1. Cell Rep. 2012 Nov 29;2(5):1197-206. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

DNA binding by GATA transcription factor suggests mechanisms of DNA looping and
long-range gene regulation.

Chen Y(1), Bates DL, Dey R, Chen PH, Machado AC, Laird-Offringa IA, Rohs R, Chen 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Departments of Biological
Sciences and Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089,
USA.

GATA transcription factors regulate transcription during development and
differentiation by recognizing distinct GATA sites with a tandem of two conserved
zinc fingers, and by mediating long-range DNA looping. However, the molecular
basis of these processes is not well understood. Here, we determined three
crystal structures of the full DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human GATA3 protein,
which contains both zinc fingers, in complex with different DNA sites. In one
structure, both zinc fingers wrap around a palindromic GATA site, cooperatively
enhancing the binding affinity and kinetic stability. Strikingly, in the other
two structures, the two fingers of GATA DBD bind GATA sites on different DNA
molecules, thereby bridging two separate DNA fragments. This was confirmed in
solution by an in-gel fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis. These
findings not only provide insights into the structure and function of GATA
proteins but also shed light on the molecular basis of long-range gene
regulation.

Copyright Â© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3978094
PMID: 23142663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Sep 19;381(5):1292-306. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.072. Epub
2008 Jul 2.

Crystal structures of multiple GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA reveal new insights
into DNA recognition and self-association by GATA.

Bates DL(1), Chen Y, Kim G, Guo L, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors (GATA1-6) binds selected GATA sites in
vertebrate genomes to regulate specific gene expression. Although vertebrate GATA
factors have two highly conserved zinc finger motifs, how the two fingers act
together to recognize functional DNA elements is not well understood. Here we
determined the crystal structures of the C-terminal zinc finger of mouse GATA3
bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. Our structures
and accompanying biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by
GATA to closely arranged sites. One mode involves cooperative binding by two GATA
factors that interact with each other through protein-protein interactions. The
other involves simultaneous binding of the N-terminal zinc finger (N-finger) and 
the C-terminal zinc finger of the same GATA factor. Our studies represent the
first crystallographic analysis of GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA and provide new
insights into the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal 
structure also reveals a dimerization interface in GATA that has previously been 
shown to be important for GATA self-association. These findings significantly
advance our understanding of the structure and function of GATA and provide an
important framework for further investigating the in vivo mechanisms of
GATA-dependent gene regulation.

PMID: 18621058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Nov 15;18(22):5895-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.08.029.
Epub 2008 Aug 14.

Discovery of inhibitors of the channel-activating protease prostasin (CAP1/PRSS8)
utilizing structure-based design.

Tully DC(1), Vidal A, Chatterjee AK, Williams JA, Roberts MJ, Petrassi HM,
Spraggon G, Bursulaya B, Pacoma R, Shipway A, Schumacher AM, Danahay H, Harris
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, 10675 John J. Hopkins 
Dr., San Diego, CA 92121, USA. dtully@gnf.org

Structure-based design was utilized to guide the early stage optimization of a
substrate-like inhibitor to afford potent peptidomimetic inhibitors of the
channel-activating protease prostasin. The first X-ray crystal structures of
prostasin with small molecule inhibitors bound to the active site are also
reported.

PMID: 18752942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 24;43(33):10628-41.

Crystal structure of the actin binding domain of the cyclase-associated protein.

Dodatko T(1), Fedorov AA, Grynberg M, Patskovsky Y, Rozwarski DA, Jaroszewski L, 
Aronoff-Spencer E, Kondraskina E, Irving T, Godzik A, Almo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

Cyclase-associated protein (CAP or Srv2p) is a modular actin monomer binding
protein that directly regulates filament dynamics and has been implicated in a
number of complex developmental and morphological processes, including mRNA
localization and the establishment of cell polarity. The crystal structure of the
C-terminal dimerization and actin monomer binding domain (C-CAP) reveals a highly
unusual dimer, composed of monomers possessing six coils of right-handed
beta-helix flanked by antiparallel beta-strands. Domain swapping, involving the
last two strands of each monomer, results in the formation of an extended dimer
with an extensive interface. This structural and biochemical characterization
provides new insights into the organization and potential mechanistic properties 
of the multiprotein assemblies that integrate dynamic actin processes into the
overall physiology of the cell. An unanticipated finding is that the unique
tertiary structure of the C-CAP monomer provides a structural model for a wide
range of molecules, including RP2 and cofactor C, proteins involved in X-linked
retinitis pigmentosa and tubulin maturation, respectively, as well as several
uncharacterized proteins that exhibit very diverse domain organizations. Thus,
the unusual right-handed beta-helical fold present in C-CAP appears to support a 
wide range of biological functions.

PMID: 15311924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3004. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4004.

Structural analysis of human 2'-O-ribose methyltransferases involved in mRNA cap 
structure formation.

Smietanski M(1), Werner M(2), Purta E(2), Kaminska KH(2), Stepinski J(3),
Darzynkiewicz E(4), Nowotny M(5), Bujnicki JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein Engineering, International
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, ul. ks. Trojdena 4, PL-02-109 
Warsaw, Poland [2] Laboratory of Protein Structure, International Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, ul. ks. Trojdena 4, PL-02-109 Warsaw,
Poland. (2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein Engineering, International
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, ul. ks. Trojdena 4, PL-02-109 
Warsaw, Poland. (3)Division of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics,
Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, ul. Zwirki i Wigury 93, PL-02-089
Warsaw, Poland. (4)1] Division of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics, 
Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, ul. Zwirki i Wigury 93, PL-02-089
Warsaw, Poland [2] Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, ul. Zwirki i
Wigury 93, PL-02-089 Warsaw, Poland. (5)Laboratory of Protein Structure,
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, ul. ks. Trojdena
4, PL-02-109 Warsaw, Poland. (6)1] Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein
Engineering, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, ul.
ks. Trojdena 4, PL-02-109 Warsaw, Poland [2] Laboratory of Bioinformatics,
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, Adam
Mickiewicz University, ul. Umultowska 89, PL-61-614 Poznan, Poland.

The 5' cap of human messenger RNA contains 2'-O-methylation of the first and
often second transcribed nucleotide that is important for its processing,
translation and stability. Human enzymes that methylate these nucleotides, termed
CMTr1 and CMTr2, respectively, have recently been identified. However, the
structures of these enzymes and their mechanisms of action remain unknown. In the
present study, we solve the crystal structures of the active CMTr1 catalytic
domain in complex with a methyl group donor and a capped oligoribonucleotide,
thereby revealing the mechanism of specific recognition of capped RNA. This
mechanism differs significantly from viral enzymes, thus providing a framework
for their specific targeting. Based on the crystal structure of CMTr1, a
comparative model of the CMTr2 catalytic domain is generated. This model,
together with mutational analysis, leads to the identification of residues
involved in RNA and methyl group donor binding.

PMCID: PMC3941023
PMID: 24402442  [PubMed - in process]


1. J Mol Biol. 2014 Oct 23;426(21):3509-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

A structural portrait of the PDZ domain family.

Ernst A(1), Appleton BA(2), Ivarsson Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Gfeller D(1), Wiesmann
C(2), Sidhu SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research and Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, The Donnelly Centre, 160 College Street,
Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada. (2)Department of Early Discovery Biochemistry,
Genentech Inc, San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Banting and Best Department of
Medical Research and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, The
Donnelly Centre, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada. Electronic
address: sachdev.sidhu@utoronto.ca.

PDZ (PSD-95/Discs-large/ZO1) domains are interaction modules that typically bind 
to specific C-terminal sequences of partner proteins and assemble signaling
complexes in multicellular organisms. We have analyzed the existing database of
PDZ domain structures in the context of a specificity tree based on binding
specificities defined by peptide-phage binding selections. We have identified 16 
structures of PDZ domains in complex with high-affinity ligands and have
elucidated four additional structures to assemble a structural database that
covers most of the branches of the PDZ specificity tree. A detailed comparison of
the structures reveals features that are responsible for the diverse
specificities across the PDZ domain family. Specificity differences can be
explained by differences in PDZ residues that are in contact with the peptide
ligands, but these contacts involve both side-chain and main-chain interactions. 
Most PDZ domains bind peptides in a canonical conformation in which the ligand
main chain adopts an extended Î²-strand conformation by interacting in an
antiparallel fashion with a PDZ Î²-strand. However, a subset of PDZ domains bind
peptides with a bent main-chain conformation and the specificities of these
non-canonical domains could not be explained based on canonical structures. Our
analysis provides a structural portrait of the PDZ domain family, which serves as
a guide in understanding the structural basis for the diverse specificities
across the family.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 30;108(35):14443-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105898108. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Structural basis of simultaneous recruitment of the transcriptional regulators
LMO2 and FOG1/ZFPM1 by the transcription factor GATA1.

Wilkinson-White L(1), Gamsjaeger R, Dastmalchi S, Wienert B, Stokes PH, Crossley 
M, Mackay JP, Matthews JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006
Sydney, Australia.

The control of red blood cell and megakaryocyte development by the regulatory
protein GATA1 is a paradigm for transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
cell lineage differentiation and maturation. Most GATA1-regulated events require 
GATA1 to bind FOG1, and essentially all GATA1-activated genes are cooccupied by a
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 complex; however, it is not known whether FOG1 and
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 are simultaneously recruited by GATA1. Our structural data
reveal that the FOG1-binding domain of GATA1, the N finger, can also directly
contact LMO2 and show that, despite the small size (< 50 residues) of the GATA1 N
finger, both FOG1 and LMO2 can simultaneously bind this domain. LMO2 in turn can 
simultaneously contact both GATA1 and the DNA-binding protein TAL1/E2A at
bipartite E-box/WGATAR sites. Taken together, our data provide the first
structural snapshot of multiprotein complex formation at GATA1-dependent genes
and support a model in which FOG1 and TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 can cooccupy
E-box/WGATAR sites to facilitate GATA1-mediated activation of gene activation.

PMCID: PMC3167507
PMID: 21844373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Biomol NMR. 1999 Mar;13(3):249-62.

The solution structure of the N-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 reveals a specific
binding face for the transcriptional co-factor FOG.

Kowalski K(1), Czolij R, King GF, Crossley M, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Zinc fingers (ZnFs) are generally regarded as DNA-binding motifs. However, a
number of recent reports have implicated particular ZnFs in the mediation of
protein-protein interactions. The N-terminal ZnF of GATA-1 (NF) is one such
finger, having been shown to interact with a number of other proteins, including 
the recently discovered transcriptional co-factor FOG. Here we solve the
three-dimensional structure of the NF in solution using multidimensional 1H/15N
NMR spectroscopy, and we use 1H/15N spin relaxation measurements to investigate
its backbone dynamics. The structure consists of two distorted beta-hairpins and 
a single alpha-helix, and is similar to that of the C-terminal ZnF of chicken
GATA-1. Comparisons of the NF structure with those of other C4-type zinc binding 
motifs, including hormone receptor and LIM domains, also reveal substantial
structural homology. Finally, we use the structure to map the spatial locations
of NF residues shown by mutagenesis to be essential for FOG binding, and
demonstrate that these residues all lie on a single face of the NF. Notably, this
face is well removed from the putative DNA-binding face of the NF, an observation
which is suggestive of simultaneous roles for the NF; that is, stabilisation of
GATA-1 DNA complexes and recruitment of FOG to GATA-1-controlled promoter
regions.

PMID: 10212985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jan 18;102(3):583-8. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Zinc fingers as protein recognition motifs: structural basis for the
GATA-1/friend of GATA interaction.

Liew CK(1), Simpson RJ, Kwan AH, Crofts LA, Loughlin FE, Matthews JM, Crossley M,
Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales 2006, Australia.

GATA-1 and friend of GATA (FOG) are zinc-finger transcription factors that
physically interact to play essential roles in erythroid and megakaryocytic
development. Several naturally occurring mutations in the GATA-1 gene that alter 
the FOG-binding domain have been reported. The mutations are associated with
familial anemias and thrombocytopenias of differing severity. To elucidate the
molecular basis for the GATA-1/FOG interaction, we have determined the
three-dimensional structure of a complex comprising the interaction domains of
these proteins. The structure reveals how zinc fingers can act as protein
recognition motifs. Details of the architecture of the contact domains and their 
physical properties provide a molecular explanation for how the GATA-1 mutations 
contribute to distinct but related genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC545545
PMID: 15644435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cell Rep. 2012 Nov 29;2(5):1197-206. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

DNA binding by GATA transcription factor suggests mechanisms of DNA looping and
long-range gene regulation.

Chen Y(1), Bates DL, Dey R, Chen PH, Machado AC, Laird-Offringa IA, Rohs R, Chen 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Departments of Biological
Sciences and Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089,
USA.

GATA transcription factors regulate transcription during development and
differentiation by recognizing distinct GATA sites with a tandem of two conserved
zinc fingers, and by mediating long-range DNA looping. However, the molecular
basis of these processes is not well understood. Here, we determined three
crystal structures of the full DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human GATA3 protein,
which contains both zinc fingers, in complex with different DNA sites. In one
structure, both zinc fingers wrap around a palindromic GATA site, cooperatively
enhancing the binding affinity and kinetic stability. Strikingly, in the other
two structures, the two fingers of GATA DBD bind GATA sites on different DNA
molecules, thereby bridging two separate DNA fragments. This was confirmed in
solution by an in-gel fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis. These
findings not only provide insights into the structure and function of GATA
proteins but also shed light on the molecular basis of long-range gene
regulation.

Copyright Â© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3978094
PMID: 23142663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Sep 19;381(5):1292-306. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.072. Epub
2008 Jul 2.

Crystal structures of multiple GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA reveal new insights
into DNA recognition and self-association by GATA.

Bates DL(1), Chen Y, Kim G, Guo L, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors (GATA1-6) binds selected GATA sites in
vertebrate genomes to regulate specific gene expression. Although vertebrate GATA
factors have two highly conserved zinc finger motifs, how the two fingers act
together to recognize functional DNA elements is not well understood. Here we
determined the crystal structures of the C-terminal zinc finger of mouse GATA3
bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. Our structures
and accompanying biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by
GATA to closely arranged sites. One mode involves cooperative binding by two GATA
factors that interact with each other through protein-protein interactions. The
other involves simultaneous binding of the N-terminal zinc finger (N-finger) and 
the C-terminal zinc finger of the same GATA factor. Our studies represent the
first crystallographic analysis of GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA and provide new
insights into the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal 
structure also reveals a dimerization interface in GATA that has previously been 
shown to be important for GATA self-association. These findings significantly
advance our understanding of the structure and function of GATA and provide an
important framework for further investigating the in vivo mechanisms of
GATA-dependent gene regulation.

PMID: 18621058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Oct 12;373(1):141-52. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Structure and function of the engineered multicopper oxidase CueO from
Escherichia coli--deletion of the methionine-rich helical region covering the
substrate-binding site.

Kataoka K(1), Komori H, Ueki Y, Konno Y, Kamitaka Y, Kurose S, Tsujimura S,
Higuchi Y, Kano K, Seo D, Sakurai T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Material Sciences, Graduate School of Natural Science and
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

CueO is a multicopper oxidase (MCO) that is involved in the homeostasis of Cu in 
Escherichia coli and is the sole cuprous oxidase to have ever been found.
Differing from other MCOs, the substrate-binding site of CueO is deeply buried
under a methionine-rich helical region including alpha-helices 5, 6, and 7 that
interfere with the access of organic substrates. We deleted the region
Pro357-His406 and replaced it with a Gly-Gly linker. The crystal structures of a 
truncated mutant in the presence and in the absence of excess Cu(II) indicated
that the scaffold of the CueO molecule and metal-binding sites were reserved in
comparison with those of CueO. In addition, the high thermostability of the
protein molecule and its spectroscopic and magnetic properties due to four Cu
centers were also conserved after truncation. As for functions, the cuprous
oxidase activity of the mutant was reduced to ca 10% that of recombinant CueO
owing to the decrease in the affinity of the labile Cu site for Cu(I) ions,
although activities for laccase substrates such as
2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid), p-phenylenediamine, and
2,6-dimethoxyphenol increased due to changes in the access of these organic
substrates to the type I Cu site. The present engineering of CueO indicates that 
the methionine-rich alpha-helices function as a barrier to the access of bulky
organic substrates, which provides CueO with specificity as a cuprous oxidase.

PMID: 17804014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cell. 1994 May 6;77(3):451-9.

Crystal structure of MyoD bHLH domain-DNA complex: perspectives on DNA
recognition and implications for transcriptional activation.

Ma PC(1), Rould MA, Weintraub H, Pabo CO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

The crystal structure of a MyoD basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain-DNA complex 
has been solved and refined at 2.8 A resolution. This structure proves that bHLH 
and bHLH-leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) proteins are remarkably similar; it helps us
understand subtle differences in binding preferences for these proteins; and it
has surprising implications for our understanding of transcription. Specifically,
Ala-114 and Thr-115, which are required for positive control in the myogenic
proteins, are buried at the protein-DNA interface. These residues are not
available for direct protein-protein contacts, but they may determine the
conformation of Arg-111. Comparisons with Max suggest that the conformation of
this arginine, which is different in the two structures, may play an important
role in myogenic transcription.

PMID: 8181063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1834(10):2036-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.05.020. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Mechanistic features of Salmonella typhimurium propionate kinase (TdcD): insights
from kinetic and crystallographic studies.

Chittori S(1), Simanshu DK, Banerjee S, Murthy AM, Mathivanan S, Savithri HS,
Murthy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka
560012, India. Electronic address: sagar@mbu.iisc.ernet.in.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) play a major role in carbon cycle and can be
utilized as a source of carbon and energy by bacteria. Salmonella typhimurium
propionate kinase (StTdcD) catalyzes reversible transfer of the Î³-phosphate of
ATP to propionate during l-threonine degradation to propionate. Kinetic analysis 
revealed that StTdcD possesses broad ligand specificity and could be activated by
various SCFAs (propionate>acetateâbutyrate), nucleotides (ATPâGTP>CTPâTTP;
dATP>dGTP>dCTP) and metal ions (Mg(2+)âMn(2+)>Co(2+)). Inhibition of StTdcD by
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates such as citrate, succinate,
Î±-ketoglutarate and malate suggests that the enzyme could be under plausible
feedback regulation. Crystal structures of StTdcD bound to PO4 (phosphate), AMP, 
ATP, Ap4 (adenosine tetraphosphate), GMP, GDP, GTP, CMP and CTP revealed that
binding of nucleotide mainly involves hydrophobic interactions with the base
moiety and could account for the broad biochemical specificity observed between
the enzyme and nucleotides. Modeling and site-directed mutagenesis studies
suggest Ala88 to be an important residue involved in determining the rate of
catalysis with SCFA substrates. Molecular dynamics simulations on monomeric and
dimeric forms of StTdcD revealed plausible open and closed states, and also
suggested role for dimerization in stabilizing segment 235-290 involved in
interfacial interactions and ligand binding. Observation of an ethylene glycol
molecule bound sufficiently close to the Î³-phosphate in StTdcD complexes with
triphosphate nucleotides supports direct in-line phosphoryl transfer.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):17351-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.231258. Epub 2011
Mar 23.

Structural basis for ligand recognition and discrimination of a quorum-quenching 
antibody.

Kirchdoerfer RN(1), Garner AL, Flack CE, Mee JM, Horswill AR, Janda KD, Kaufmann 
GF, Wilson IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

In the postantibiotic era, available treatment options for severe bacterial
infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus have become
limited. Therefore, new and innovative approaches are needed to combat such
life-threatening infections. Virulence factor expression in S. aureus is
regulated in a cell density-dependent manner using "quorum sensing," which
involves generation and secretion of autoinducing peptides (AIPs) into the
surrounding environment to activate a bacterial sensor kinase at a particular
threshold concentration. Mouse monoclonal antibody AP4-24H11 was shown previously
to blunt quorum sensing-mediated changes in gene expression in vitro and protect 
mice from a lethal dose of S. aureus by sequestering the AIP signal. We have
elucidated the crystal structure of the AP4-24H11 Fab in complex with AIP-4 at
2.5 â« resolution to determine its mechanism of ligand recognition. A key Glu(H95)
provides much of the binding specificity through formation of hydrogen bonds with
each of the four amide nitrogens in the AIP-4 macrocyclic ring. Importantly,
these structural data give clues as to the interactions between the cognate
staphylococcal AIP receptors AgrC and the AIPs, as AP4-24H11Â·AIP-4 binding
recapitulates features that have been proposed for AgrC-AIP recognition.
Additionally, these structural insights may enable the engineering of AIP
cross-reactive antibodies or quorum quenching vaccines for use in active or
passive immunotherapy for prevention or treatment of S. aureus infections.

PMCID: PMC3089576
PMID: 21454495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):17351-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.231258. Epub 2011
Mar 23.

Structural basis for ligand recognition and discrimination of a quorum-quenching 
antibody.

Kirchdoerfer RN(1), Garner AL, Flack CE, Mee JM, Horswill AR, Janda KD, Kaufmann 
GF, Wilson IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

In the postantibiotic era, available treatment options for severe bacterial
infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus have become
limited. Therefore, new and innovative approaches are needed to combat such
life-threatening infections. Virulence factor expression in S. aureus is
regulated in a cell density-dependent manner using "quorum sensing," which
involves generation and secretion of autoinducing peptides (AIPs) into the
surrounding environment to activate a bacterial sensor kinase at a particular
threshold concentration. Mouse monoclonal antibody AP4-24H11 was shown previously
to blunt quorum sensing-mediated changes in gene expression in vitro and protect 
mice from a lethal dose of S. aureus by sequestering the AIP signal. We have
elucidated the crystal structure of the AP4-24H11 Fab in complex with AIP-4 at
2.5 â« resolution to determine its mechanism of ligand recognition. A key Glu(H95)
provides much of the binding specificity through formation of hydrogen bonds with
each of the four amide nitrogens in the AIP-4 macrocyclic ring. Importantly,
these structural data give clues as to the interactions between the cognate
staphylococcal AIP receptors AgrC and the AIPs, as AP4-24H11Â·AIP-4 binding
recapitulates features that have been proposed for AgrC-AIP recognition.
Additionally, these structural insights may enable the engineering of AIP
cross-reactive antibodies or quorum quenching vaccines for use in active or
passive immunotherapy for prevention or treatment of S. aureus infections.

PMCID: PMC3089576
PMID: 21454495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
 
1. Biochem J. 2014 Sep 15;462(3):441-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140382.

Structural and functional characterization of ochratoxinase, a novel
mycotoxin-degrading enzyme.

Dobritzsch D, Wang H, Schneider G(1), Yu S.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Ochratoxin, with ochratoxin A as the dominant form, is one of the five major
mycotoxins most harmful to humans and animals. It is produced by Aspergillus and 
Penicillium species and occurs in a wide range of agricultural products.
Detoxification of contaminated food is a challenging health issue. In the present
paper we report the identification, characterization and crystal structure (at
2.2 Ã) of a novel microbial ochratoxinase from Aspergillus niger. A putative
amidase gene encoding a 480 amino acid polypeptide was cloned and homologously
expressed in A. niger. The recombinant protein is N-terminally truncated,
thermostable, has optimal activity at pH ~6 and 66Â°C, and is more efficient in
ochratoxin A hydrolysis than carboxypeptidase A and Y, the two previously known
enzymes capable of degrading this mycotoxin. The subunit of the homo-octameric
enzyme folds into a two-domain structure characteristic of a metal dependent
amidohydrolase, with a twisted TIM (triosephosphateisomerase)-barrel and a
smaller Î²-sandwich domain. The active site contains an aspartate residue for
acid-base catalysis, and a carboxylated lysine and four histidine residues for
binding of a binuclear metal centre.

PMID: 24947135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Apr;81(7):2612-24. doi: 10.1128/AEM.04016-14. Epub
2015 Jan 30.

Evolutionary expansion of the amidohydrolase superfamily in bacteria in response 
to the synthetic compounds molinate and diuron.

Sugrue E(1), Fraser NJ(1), Hopkins DH(1), Carr PD(1), Khurana JL(2), Oakeshott
JG(2), Scott C(2), Jackson CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. (2)CSIRO, Canberra, ACT, Australia. (3)Research School of Chemistry,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia CSIRO, Canberra, ACT,
Australia colin.jackson@anu.edu.au.

The amidohydrolase superfamily has remarkable functional diversity, with
considerable structural and functional annotation of known sequences. In
microbes, the recent evolution of several members of this family to catalyze the 
breakdown of environmental xenobiotics is not well understood. An evolutionary
transition from binuclear to mononuclear metal ion coordination at the active
sites of these enzymes could produce large functional changes such as those
observed in nature, but there are few clear examples available to support this
hypothesis. To investigate the role of binuclear-mononuclear active-site
transitions in the evolution of new function in this superfamily, we have
characterized two recently evolved enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of the
synthetic herbicides molinate (MolA) and phenylurea (PuhB). In this work, the
crystal structures, mutagenesis, metal ion analysis, and enzyme kinetics of both 
MolA and PuhB establish that these enzymes utilize a mononuclear active site.
However, bioinformatics and structural comparisons reveal that the closest
putative ancestor of these enzymes had a binuclear active site, indicating that a
binuclear-mononuclear transition has occurred. These proteins may represent
examples of evolution modifying the characteristics of existing catalysts to
satisfy new requirements, specifically, metal ion rearrangement leading to large 
leaps in activity that would not otherwise be possible.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4357960 [Available on 2015-10-01]
PMID: 25636851  [PubMed - in process]

1. EMBO J. 1994 Jan 1;13(1):180-9.

Structure and function of the b/HLH/Z domain of USF.

FerrÃ©-D'AmarÃ© AR(1), Pognonec P, Roeder RG, Burley SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

The basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (b/HLH/Z) transcription factor upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) and its isolated DNA binding domain undergo a random
coil to alpha-helix folding transition on recognizing their cognate DNA. The USF 
b/HLH cocrystal structure resembles the structure of the b/HLH/Z domain of the
homologous protein Max and reveals (i) that the truncated, b/HLH DNA binding
domain homodimerizes, forming a parallel, left-handed four-helix bundle, and (ii)
that the basic region becomes alpha-helical on binding to the major groove of the
DNA sequence CACGTG. Hydrodynamic measurements show that the b/HLH/Z DNA binding 
domain of USF exists as a bivalent homotetramer. This tetramer forms at the USF
physiological intranuclear concentration, and depends on the integrity of the
leucine zipper motif. The ability to bind simultaneously to two independent sites
suggests a role in DNA looping for the b/HLH/Z and Myc-related families of
eukaryotic transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC394791
PMID: 8306960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Science. 2012 Jun 8;336(6086):1274. doi: 10.1126/science.1218713. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

Crystal structure of human enterovirus 71.

Plevka P(1), Perera R, Cardosa J, Kuhn RJ, Rossmann MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA.

Enterovirus 71 is a picornavirus associated with fatal neurological illness in
infants and young children. Here, we report the crystal structure of enterovirus 
71 and show that, unlike in other enteroviruses, the "pocket factor," a small
molecule that stabilizes the virus, is partly exposed on the floor of the
"canyon." Thus, the structure of antiviral compounds may require a hydrophilic
head group designed to interact with residues at the entrance of the pocket.

PMCID: PMC3448362
PMID: 22383808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nature. 1998 Apr 16;392(6677):677-84.

Electron transfer by domain movement in cytochrome bc1.

Zhang Z(1), Huang L, Shulmeister VM, Chi YI, Kim KK, Hung LW, Crofts AR, Berry
EA, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)E. O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, 94720, 
USA.

The cytochrome bc1 is one of the three major respiratory enzyme complexes
residing in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Cytochrome bc1 transfers electrons 
from ubiquinol to cytochrome c and uses the energy thus released to form an
electrochemical gradient across the inner membrane. Our X-ray crystal structures 
of the complex from chicken, cow and rabbit in both the presence and absence of
inhibitors of quinone oxidation, reveal two different locations for the extrinsic
domain of one component of the enzyme, an iron-sulphur protein. One location is
close enough to the supposed quinol oxidation site to allow reduction of the Fe-S
protein by ubiquinol. The other site is close enough to cytochrome c1 to allow
oxidation of the Fe-S protein by the cytochrome. As neither location will allow
both reactions to proceed at a suitable rate, the reaction mechanism must involve
movement of the extrinsic domain of the Fe-S component in order to shuttle
electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c1. Such a mechanism has not previously
been observed in redox protein complexes.

PMID: 9565029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 May;17(5):555-60. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1790. Epub 2010 Apr
18.

Structural aspects of messenger RNA reading frame maintenance by the ribosome.

Jenner LB(1), Demeshkina N, Yusupova G, Yusupov M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de GÃ©nÃ©tique et de Biologie MolÃ©culaire et Cellulaire, DÃ©partement de
Biologie et de GÃ©nomique Structurales, Illkirch, France.

One key question in protein biosynthesis is how the ribosome couples mRNA and
tRNA movements to prevent disruption of weak codon-anticodon interactions and
loss of the translational reading frame during translocation. Here we report the 
complete path of mRNA on the 70S ribosome at the atomic level (3.1-A resolution),
and we show that one of the conformational rearrangements that occurs upon
transition from initiation to elongation is a narrowing of the downstream mRNA
tunnel. This rearrangement triggers formation of a network of interactions
between the mRNA downstream of the A-site codon and the elongating ribosome. Our 
data elucidate the mechanism by which hypermodified nucleoside 2-methylthio-N6
isopentenyl adenosine at position 37 (ms(2)i(6)A37) in tRNA(Phe)(GAA) stabilizes 
mRNA-tRNA interactions in all three tRNA binding sites. Another network of
contacts is formed between this tRNA modification and ribosomal elements
surrounding the mRNA E/P kink, resulting in the anchoring of P-site tRNA. These
data allow rationalization of how modification deficiencies of ms(2)i(6)A37 in
tRNAs may lead to shifts of the translational reading frame.

PMID: 20400952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1137-40. doi: 10.1126/science.1246729.

Crystal structures of nucleotide-free and glutathione-bound mitochondrial ABC
transporter Atm1.

Srinivasan V(1), Pierik AJ, Lill R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fÃ¼r Zytobiologie, Philipps-UniversitÃ¤t Marburg, Robert-Koch-Strasse
6, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

The yeast mitochondrial ABC transporter Atm1, in concert with glutathione,
functions in the export of a substrate required for cytosolic-nuclear iron-sulfur
protein biogenesis and cellular iron regulation. Defects in the human ortholog
ABCB7 cause the sideroblastic anemia XLSA/A. Here, we report the crystal
structures of free and glutathione-bound Atm1 in inward-facing, open
conformations at 3.06- and 3.38-angstrom resolution, respectively. The
glutathione binding site includes a residue mutated in XLSA/A and is located
close to the inner membrane surface in a large cavity. The two nucleotide-free
adenosine 5'-triphosphate binding domains do not interact yet are kept in close
vicinity through tight interaction of the two C-terminal Î±-helices of the Atm1
dimer. The resulting protein stabilization may be a common structural feature of 
all ABC exporters.

PMID: 24604199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Jun;21(6):513-21. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2822. Epub 2014 May
4.

Structural basis of starvation-induced assembly of the autophagy initiation
complex.

Fujioka Y(1), Suzuki SW(2), Yamamoto H(3), Kondo-Kakuta C(4), Kimura Y(5), Hirano
H(5), Akada R(6), Inagaki F(7), Ohsumi Y(4), Noda NN(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Microbial Chemistry (BIKAKEN), Tokyo, Japan. [2]. (2)1]
Frontier Research Center, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan. [2]
Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Yokohama, Japan. [3]. (3)1] Frontier Research Center, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan. [2]. (4)Frontier Research Center, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan. (5)Graduate School of Medical Life Science and
Advanced Medical Research Center, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan.
(6)Department of Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of Medicine,
Yamaguchi University, Ube, Japan. (7)1] Department of Structural Biology, Faculty
of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. [2] Core Research 
for Evolutionary Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Tokyo, Japan. (8)1] Institute of Microbial Chemistry (BIKAKEN), Tokyo,
Japan. [2] Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology (CREST), Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan.

Assembly of the preautophagosomal structure (PAS) is essential for autophagy
initiation in yeast. Starvation-induced dephosphorylation of Atg13 is required
for the formation of the Atg1-Atg13-Atg17-Atg29-Atg31 complex (Atg1 complex), a
prerequisite for PAS assembly. However, molecular details underlying these events
have not been established. Here we studied the interactions of yeast Atg13 with
Atg1 and Atg17 by X-ray crystallography. Atg13 binds tandem microtubule
interacting and transport domains in Atg1, using an elongated helix-loop-helix
region. Atg13 also binds Atg17, using a short region, thereby bridging Atg1 and
Atg17 and leading to Atg1-complex formation. Dephosphorylation of specific
serines in Atg13 enhanced its interaction with not only Atg1 but also Atg17.
These observations update the autophagy-initiation model as follows: upon
starvation, dephosphorylated Atg13 binds both Atg1 and Atg17, and this promotes
PAS assembly and autophagy progression.

PMID: 24793651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35242-7.

The structure of a CREB bZIP.somatostatin CRE complex reveals the basis for
selective dimerization and divalent cation-enhanced DNA binding.

Schumacher MA(1), Goodman RH, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Vollum Institute,
Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

The cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) is central to second messenger
regulated transcription. To elucidate the structural mechanisms of DNA binding
and selective dimerization of CREB, we determined to 3.0 A resolution, the
structure of the CREB bZIP (residues 283-341) bound to a 21-base pair
deoxynucleotide that encompasses the canonical 8-base pair somatostatin cAMP
response element (SSCRE). The CREB dimer is stabilized in part by ionic
interactions from Arg(314) to Glu(319') and Glu(328) to Lys(333') as well as a
hydrogen bond network that links the carboxamide side chains of
Gln(322')-Asn(321)-Asn(321')-Gln(322). Critical to family selective dimerization 
are intersubunit hydrogen bonds between basic region residue Tyr(307) and leucine
zipper residue Glu(312), which are conserved in all CREB/CREM/ATF-1 family
members. Strikingly, the structure reveals a hexahydrated Mg(2+) ion bound in the
cavity between the basic region and SSCRE that makes a water-mediated DNA
contact. DNA binding studies demonstrate that Mg(2+) ions enhance CREB bZIP:SSCRE
binding by more than 25-fold and suggest a possible physiological role for this
ion in somatostatin cAMP response element and potentially other CRE-mediated gene
expression.

PMID: 10952992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Chem Biol. 2006 Jan;13(1):81-90.

Target structure-based discovery of small molecules that block human p53 and CREB
binding protein association.

Sachchidanand(1), Resnick-Silverman L, Yan S, Mutjaba S, Liu WJ, Zeng L, Manfredi
JJ, Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York 10029, USA.

Lysine acetylation of human tumor suppressor p53 in response to cellular stress
signals is required for its function as a transcription factor that regulates
cell cycle arrest, senescence, or apoptosis. Here, we report small molecules that
block lysine 382-acetylated p53 association with the bromodomain of the
coactivator CBP, an interaction essential for p53-induced transcription of the
cell cycle inhibitor p21 in response to DNA damage. These chemicals were
discovered in target structure-guided nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
screening of a focused chemical library constructed based on the structural
knowledge of CBP bromodomain/p53-AcK382 binding. Structural characterization
shows that these chemicals inhibit CBP/p53 association by binding to the
acetyl-lysine binding site of the bromodomain. Cell-based functional assays
demonstrate that the lead chemicals can modulate p53 stability and function in
response to DNA damage.

PMID: 16426974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cell. 1997 Dec 12;91(6):741-52.

Solution structure of the KIX domain of CBP bound to the transactivation domain
of CREB: a model for activator:coactivator interactions.

Radhakrishnan I(1), PÃ©rez-Alvarado GC, Parker D, Dyson HJ, Montminy MR, Wright
PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical
Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The nuclear factor CREB activates transcription of target genes in part through
direct interactions with the KIX domain of the coactivator CBP in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. The solution structure of the complex formed by
the phosphorylated kinase-inducible domain (pKID) of CREB with KIX reveals that
pKID undergoes a coil-->helix folding transition upon binding to KIX, forming two
alpha helices. The amphipathic helix alphaB of pKID interacts with a hydrophobic 
groove defined by helices alpha1 and alpha3 of KIX. The other pKID helix, alphaA,
contacts a different face of the alpha3 helix. The phosphate group of the
critical phosphoserine residue of pKID forms a hydrogen bond to the side chain of
Tyr-658 of KIX. The structure provides a model for interactions between other
transactivation domains and their targets.

PMID: 9413984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Chem Biol. 2011 Apr 22;18(4):531-41. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.12.021.

A small molecule binding to the coactivator CREB-binding protein blocks apoptosis
in cardiomyocytes.

Borah JC(1), Mujtaba S, Karakikes I, Zeng L, Muller M, Patel J, Moshkina N,
Morohashi K, Zhang W, Gerona-Navarro G, Hajjar RJ, Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

As a master transcription factor in cellular responses to external stress, tumor 
suppressor p53 is tightly regulated. Excessive p53 activity during myocardial
ischemia causes irreversible cellular injury and cardiomyocyte death. p53
activation is dependent on lysine acetylation by the lysine acetyltransferase and
transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and on
acetylation-directed CBP recruitment for p53 target gene expression. Here, we
report a small molecule ischemin, developed with a structure-guided approach to
inhibit the acetyl-lysine binding activity of the bromodomain of CBP. We show
that ischemin alters post-translational modifications on p53 and histones,
inhibits p53 interaction with CBP and transcriptional activity in cells, and
prevents apoptosis in ischemic cardiomyocytes. Our study suggests small molecule 
modulation of acetylation-mediated interactions in gene transcription as a new
approach to therapeutic interventions of human disorders such as myocardial
ischemia.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3103858
PMID: 21513889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Biofactors. 2009 Mar-Apr;35(2):193-9. doi: 10.1002/biof.29.

Physiological factors that regulate skin pigmentation.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Hearing VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric and Environmental Dermatology, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. yujin@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

More than 150 genes have been identified that affect skin color either directly
or indirectly, and we review current understanding of physiological factors that 
regulate skin pigmentation. We focus on melanosome biogenesis, transport and
transfer, melanogenic regulators in melanocytes, and factors derived from
keratinocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, hormones, inflammatory cells, and 
nerves. Enzymatic components of melanosomes include tyrosinase,
tyrosinase-related protein 1, and dopachrome tautomerase, which depend on the
functions of OA1, P, MATP, ATP7A, and BLOC-1 to synthesize eumelanins and
pheomelanins. The main structural component of melanosomes is Pmel17/gp100/Silv, 
whose sorting involves adaptor protein 1A (AP1A), AP1B, AP2, and spectrin, as
well as a chaperone-like component, MART-1. During their maturation, melanosomes 
move from the perinuclear area toward the plasma membrane. Microtubules, dynein, 
kinesin, actin filaments, Rab27a, melanophilin, myosin Va, and Slp2-a are
involved in melanosome transport. Foxn1 and p53 up-regulate skin pigmentation via
bFGF and POMC derivatives including alpha-MSH and ACTH, respectively. Other
critical factors that affect skin pigmentation include MC1R, CREB, ASP, MITF,
PAX3, SOX9/10, LEF-1/TCF, PAR-2, DKK1, SCF, HGF, GM-CSF, endothelin-1,
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes, neurotrophins, and neuropeptides. UV 
radiation up-regulates most factors that increase melanogenesis. Further studies 
will elucidate the currently unknown functions of many other pigment
genes/proteins. (c) 2009 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2793097
PMID: 19449448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Biochemistry. 2009 Aug 25;48(33):7849-55. doi: 10.1021/bi901003k.

Solution structures of the actuator domain of ATP7A and ATP7B, the Menkes and
Wilson disease proteins.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Cantini F, Migliardi M, Natile G, Nushi F, Rosato A.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM)-University of Florence, Via L. Sacconi 6,
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

ATP7A and ATP7B are two human P(1B)-type ATPases that have a crucial role in
maintaining copper(I) homeostasis. Among the various domains of these enzymes,
one, called the Actuator or A-domain, has a regulatory function and is required
for the phosphatase step of the catalytic cycle (dephosphorylation of the
intermediate formed during ATP hydrolysis). Here we report the solution
structures of the A-domain of both proteins, solved by heteronuclear NMR
spectroscopy and a characterization of the dynamics of the A-domain of ATP7A. We 
observed that the catalytically important TGE loop protrudes from the structure
ready for interaction with the phosphorylated site in the ATP-binding domain. The
loop is rigid, suggesting that the catalytic step does not require substantial
structural flexibility or rearrangements. The present structures were useful to
rationalize the molecular effects of disease-causing mutations. In particular, it
can be concluded that mutations occurring in the A-domain either destabilize the 
fold of the domain (such as Gly860Val in ATP7A) or affect the network of
communication within the domain (such as Leu873Arg in ATP7A) or with the other
domains of the enzyme (such as Gly853Arg in ATP7A).

PMID: 19645496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 29;281(39):29141-7. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Solution structure and intermolecular interactions of the third metal-binding
domain of ATP7A, the Menkes disease protein.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Cantini F, DellaMalva N, Herrmann T, Rosato A, WÃ¼thrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM), University of Florence, Via L. Sacconi 6,
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

The third metal-binding domain of the human Menkes protein (MNK3), a
copper(I)-transporting ATPase, has been expressed in Escherichia coli and
characterized in solution. The solution structure of MNK3, its copper(I)-binding 
properties, and its interaction with the physiological partner, HAH1, have been
studied. MNK3 is the domain most dissimilar in structure from the other domains
of the Menkes protein. This is reflected in a significant rearrangement of the
last strand of the four-stranded beta-sheet when compared with the other known
homologous proteins or protein domains. MNK3 is also peculiar with respect to its
interaction with the copper(I) ion, as it was found to be a comparatively weak
binder. Copper(I) transfer from metal-loaded HAH1 was observed experimentally,
but the metal distribution was shifted toward binding by HAH1. This is at
variance with what is observed for the other Menkes domains.

PMID: 16873374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 29;281(39):29141-7. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Solution structure and intermolecular interactions of the third metal-binding
domain of ATP7A, the Menkes disease protein.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Cantini F, DellaMalva N, Herrmann T, Rosato A, WÃ¼thrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM), University of Florence, Via L. Sacconi 6,
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

The third metal-binding domain of the human Menkes protein (MNK3), a
copper(I)-transporting ATPase, has been expressed in Escherichia coli and
characterized in solution. The solution structure of MNK3, its copper(I)-binding 
properties, and its interaction with the physiological partner, HAH1, have been
studied. MNK3 is the domain most dissimilar in structure from the other domains
of the Menkes protein. This is reflected in a significant rearrangement of the
last strand of the four-stranded beta-sheet when compared with the other known
homologous proteins or protein domains. MNK3 is also peculiar with respect to its
interaction with the copper(I) ion, as it was found to be a comparatively weak
binder. Copper(I) transfer from metal-loaded HAH1 was observed experimentally,
but the metal distribution was shifted toward binding by HAH1. This is at
variance with what is observed for the other Menkes domains.

PMID: 16873374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Biochemistry. 2004 Mar 30;43(12):3396-403.

Solution structure and backbone dynamics of the Cu(I) and apo forms of the second
metal-binding domain of the Menkes protein ATP7A.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Del Conte R, D'Onofrio M, Rosato A.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center, University of Florence, Via L. Sacconi 6, 50019
Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

The second domain of the human Menkes protein (MNK2), formed by 72 residues, has 
been expressed in Escherichia coli, and its structure has been determined by NMR 
in both the apo and copper-loaded forms. The structures, obtained with (13)C- and
(15)N-labeled samples, are of high quality with backbone rmsd values of 0.51 and 
0.41 A and CYANA target functions of 0.39 and 0.38 A(2), respectively. The loop
involved in copper binding is part of a hydrophobic patch, which is maintained in
both forms. Conformational mobility is observed in the apo form in the same loop.
A comparison with metallochaperones and soluble domains of P-type ATPases allows 
us to relate the primary structure to the occurrence of structural rearrangements
upon copper binding.

PMID: 15035611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biofactors. 2009 Mar-Apr;35(2):193-9. doi: 10.1002/biof.29.

Physiological factors that regulate skin pigmentation.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Hearing VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric and Environmental Dermatology, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. yujin@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

More than 150 genes have been identified that affect skin color either directly
or indirectly, and we review current understanding of physiological factors that 
regulate skin pigmentation. We focus on melanosome biogenesis, transport and
transfer, melanogenic regulators in melanocytes, and factors derived from
keratinocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, hormones, inflammatory cells, and 
nerves. Enzymatic components of melanosomes include tyrosinase,
tyrosinase-related protein 1, and dopachrome tautomerase, which depend on the
functions of OA1, P, MATP, ATP7A, and BLOC-1 to synthesize eumelanins and
pheomelanins. The main structural component of melanosomes is Pmel17/gp100/Silv, 
whose sorting involves adaptor protein 1A (AP1A), AP1B, AP2, and spectrin, as
well as a chaperone-like component, MART-1. During their maturation, melanosomes 
move from the perinuclear area toward the plasma membrane. Microtubules, dynein, 
kinesin, actin filaments, Rab27a, melanophilin, myosin Va, and Slp2-a are
involved in melanosome transport. Foxn1 and p53 up-regulate skin pigmentation via
bFGF and POMC derivatives including alpha-MSH and ACTH, respectively. Other
critical factors that affect skin pigmentation include MC1R, CREB, ASP, MITF,
PAX3, SOX9/10, LEF-1/TCF, PAR-2, DKK1, SCF, HGF, GM-CSF, endothelin-1,
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes, neurotrophins, and neuropeptides. UV 
radiation up-regulates most factors that increase melanogenesis. Further studies 
will elucidate the currently unknown functions of many other pigment
genes/proteins. (c) 2009 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2793097
PMID: 19449448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2537-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.054262. Epub 2009 
Nov 16.

The binding mode of ATP revealed by the solution structure of the N-domain of
human ATP7A.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Cantini F, Inagaki S, Migliardi M, Rosato A.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM) and Department of Chemistry, University of
Florence, Italy.

We report the solution NMR structures of the N-domain of the Menkes protein
(ATP7A) in the ATP-free and ATP-bound forms. The structures consist of a twisted 
antiparallel six-stranded beta-sheet flanked by two pairs of alpha-helices. A
protein loop of 50 amino acids located between beta 3 and beta 4 is disordered
and mobile on the subnanosecond time scale. ATP binds with an affinity constant
of (1.2 +/- 0.1) x 10(4) m(-1) and exchanges with a rate of the order of 1 x
10(3) s(-1). The ATP-binding cavity is considerably affected by the presence of
the ligand, resulting in a more compact conformation in the ATP-bound than in the
ATP-free form. This structural variation is due to the movement of the
alpha1-alpha2 and beta2-beta 3 loops, both of which are highly conserved in
copper(I)-transporting P(IB)-type ATPases. The present structure reveals a
characteristic binding mode of ATP within the protein scaffold of the
copper(I)-transporting P(IB)-type ATPases with respect to the other P-type
ATPases. In particular, the binding cavity contains mainly hydrophobic aliphatic 
residues, which are involved in van der Waal's interactions with the adenine ring
of ATP, and a Glu side chain, which forms a crucial hydrogen bond to the amino
group of ATP.

PMCID: PMC2807310
PMID: 19917612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Oct 1;86(7):872-87. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.07.025. Epub 
2013 Aug 8.

Gene expression profiling for analysis acquired oxaliplatin resistant factors in 
human gastric carcinoma TSGH-S3 cells: the role of IL-6 signaling and Nrf2/AKR1C 
axis identification.

Chen CC(1), Chu CB, Liu KJ, Huang CY, Chang JY, Pan WY, Chen HH, Cheng YH, Lee
KD, Chen MF, Kuo CC, Chen LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Chiayi,
Chiayi, Taiwan, ROC; Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
Institute of Technology, Chiayi, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, ROC.

Oxaliplatin treatment is a mainstay of treatment for advanced gastrointestinal
tract cancer, but the underlying mechanisms of acquired oxaliplatin resistance
remain largely obscured. We previously demonstrated that increased DNA repair
capacity and copper-transporting ATPase 1 (ATP7A) level contributed to
oxaliplatin resistance in the human gastric carcinoma cell line TSGH-S3 (S3). In 
the present study, we applied gene array technology to identify additional
resistance factors in S3 cells. We found that interleukin-6 (IL-6), aldo-keto
reductase 1C1 (AKR1C1), and AKR1C3 are the top 3 upregulated genes in S3 cells
when compared with parent TSGH cells. Despite a higher level of endogenous IL-6
in S3, IL-6 receptor (IR-6R, gp-80, and gp-130) levels were similar between TSGH 
and S3 cells. The addition of exogenous IL-6, IL-6 targeted siRNA, or
neutralizing antibodies neither affected Stat3 activation, a downstream target of
IL-6, nor changed oxaliplatin sensitivity in S3 cells. However, manipulation of
AKR1C activity with siRNA or AKR1C inhibitors significantly reversed oxaliplatin 
resistance. AKR1Cs are classical antioxidant response element (ARE) genes that
can be transcriptionally upregulated by nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor
2 (Nrf2). Knockdown of Nrf2 not only decreased the levels of AKR1C1, AKR1C2, and 
AKR1C3 mRNA and protein but also reversed oxaliplatin resistance in S3 cells.
Taken together, these results suggest that activation of the Nrf2/AKR1C axis may 
contribute to oxaliplatin resistance in S3 cells but that the IL-6 signaling
pathway did not contribute to resistance. Manipulation of Nrf2/AKR1Cs activity
may be useful for management of oxaliplatin-refractory gastric cancers.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cytokine. 2011 Dec;56(3):699-707. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.09.007. Epub 2011 Oct 
10.

CCL27 expression is regulated by both p38 MAPK and IKKÎ² signalling pathways.

Riis JL(1), Johansen C, Vestergaard C, Otkjaer K, Kragballe K, Iversen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Aarhus Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus 
C, Denmark. jette.lindorff.riis@ki.au.dk

The skin-specific chemokine CCL27 is believed to play a pivotal role in
establishing the inflammatory infiltrate characteristic for common inflammatory
skin diseases. Through binding to the chemokine receptor 10 (CCR10), CCL27
mediates inflammation by promoting lymphocyte migration into the skin. Little is 
known about the regulation of CCL27 gene expression. The purpose of our study was
to investigate the regulation of the IL-1Î²-induced CCL27 gene expression in
normal human keratinocytes (NHEK). Preincubation of NHEK with the inhibitory ÎºB
(IÎºB) kinase (IKK) inhibitor, SC-514, or the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) inhibitor, SB202190, revealed a profound reduction in both CCL27 mRNA and 
CCL27 protein expression indicating the significance of these pathways in the
regulation of CCL27 expression. Furthermore, the impact of inhibitors of mitogen-
and stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK1) or the mitogen-activated protein
kinase-interacting kinases (Mnk1+2), downstream kinases of p38 MAPK, on
IL-1Î²-induced CCL27 expression in NHEK were investigated. We identified seven
NF-ÎºB binding elements upstream from the CCL27 gene start codon using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Supershift analyses demonstrated the
involvement of the p50/p65 NF-ÎºB heterodimer. We conclude that IL-1Î²-induced
CCL27 gene expression in NHEK is regulated through the p38 MAPK/MSK1/Mnk1+2 as
well as the IKKÎ²/NF-ÎºB signalling pathways.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21993219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Dec;29(12):2279-88. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn221. Epub 2008
Sep 22.

Phosphorylation of eIF4E by MNKs supports protein synthesis, cell cycle
progression and proliferation in prostate cancer cells.

Bianchini A(1), Loiarro M, Bielli P, BusÃ  R, Paronetto MP, Loreni F, Geremia R,
Sette C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Cell Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 
Rome, Italy.

Deregulation of the phosphatidyl inositol trisphosphate kinase/AKT/mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) and RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/MNK
pathways frequently occurs in human prostate carcinomas (PCas) and leads to
aberrant modulation of messenger RNA (mRNA) translation. We have investigated the
relative contribution of these pathways to translational regulation and
proliferation of PCa cells. MNK-dependent phosphorylation of eIF4E is elevated in
DU145 cells, which have low basal levels of AKT/mTOR activity due to the
expression of the tumor suppressor PTEN. In contrast, eIF4E phosphorylation is
low in PC3 and LNCaP cells with mutated PTEN and constitutively active AKT/mTOR
pathway, but it can be strongly induced through inhibition of mTOR activity by
rapamycin or serum depletion. Remarkably, we found that inhibition of MNKs
strongly reduced the polysomal recruitment of terminal oligopyrimidine messenger 
RNAs (TOP mRNAs), which are known targets of mTOR-dependent translational
control. Pull-down assays of the eIF4F complex indicated that translation
initiation was differently affected by inhibition of MNKs and mTOR. In addition, 
concomitant treatment with MNK inhibitor and rapamycin exerted additive effects
on polysomal recruitment of TOP mRNAs and protein synthesis. The MNK inhibitor
was more effective than rapamycin in blocking proliferation of PTEN-expressing
cells, whereas combination of the two inhibitors suppressed cell cycle
progression in both cell lines. Microarray analysis showed that MNK affected
translation of mRNAs involved in cell cycle progression. Thus, our results
indicate that a balance between the activity of the AKT/mTO1. Cancer. 2015 Jul 28. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29586. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinicopathologic features associated with efficacy and long-term survival in
metastatic melanoma patients treated with BRAF or combined BRAF and MEK
inhibitors.

Menzies AM(1,)(2,)(3), Wilmott JS(1,)(2), Drummond M(1,)(2), Lo S(1,)(2), Lyle
M(1,)(2), Chan MM(4), Thompson JF(1,)(2,)(5,)(6), Guminski A(1,)(2,)(3), Carlino 
MS(1,)(2,)(4), Scolyer RA(1,)(2,)(5), Kefford RF(1,)(2,)(4,)(7), Long GV(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, Australia. (2)The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia. (3)Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (4)Crown
Princess Mary Cancer Centre, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (5)Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (6)Mater Hospital, Sydney, Australia. 
(7)Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The degree of response and the duration of survival of patients
treated with mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors are highly
variable. Whether baseline clinicopathologic factors can predict the clinical
course with treatment is largely unknown.
METHODS: For 142 consecutive immunotherapy- and MAPK inhibitor-naive patients
with BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma who were treated during clinical trials with
BRAF inhibitors (n = 111) or a combination of dabrafenib and trametinib (n = 31),
clinicopathologic factors were correlated with the response to MAPK inhibitors
and survival.
RESULTS: The median follow-up was 15.7 months (range, 0.6-60.5 months). The 2-,
3-, and 4-year overall survival (OS) rates were 43%, 24%, and 24%, respectively. 
A multivariate analysis demonstrated that the only clinicopathologic factors
associated with longer progression-free survival (PFS) and OS were female sex and
a normal pretreatment serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level. The BRAF V600E
genotype and an absence of primary melanoma ulceration were also independently
associated with longer PFS but not OS. The median OS was 23.5 months for patients
with normal LDH levels and 7.3 months for those with elevated LDH levels (hazard 
ratio, 0.31; P < .001). Complete responders had the best survival, but disease
progression still occurred in 2 of 7 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival occurs for a minority of patients receiving MAPK 
inhibitor treatment alone. Sex, serum LDH, BRAF genotype, and primary melanoma
ulceration status are independent factors associated with treatment outcomes.
Patients with a complete response to treatment have the best survival, but
relapses still occur. Cancer 2015. Â© 2015 American Cancer Society.

Â© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26218930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Jul 25;9:41. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0187-6.

Regulation of ERK-MAPK signaling in human epidermis.

Cursons J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Gao J(6), Hurley DG(7,)(8,)(9,)(10,)(11,)(12),
Print CG(13,)(14,)(15), Dunbar PR(16,)(17), Jacobs MD(18), Crampin
EJ(19,)(20,)(21,)(22,)(23,)(24).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (2)NICTA Victoria
Research Lab, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (3)ARC Centre 
of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of 
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (4)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (5)Maurice
Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (6)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
jerry.gao@unimelb.edu.au. (7)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (8)NICTA Victoria Research Lab, Melbourne,
Australia. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (9)Auckland Bioengineering Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au.
(10)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (11)Bioinformatics Institute, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (12)Faculty of
Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (13)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (14)Bioinformatics Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz.
(15)Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (16)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (17)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (18)Department of Biology, New Zealand International
College, ACG New Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand. marc.jacobs@gmx.com. (19)Systems
Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (20)ARC Centre of Excellence
in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.
(21)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (22)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (23)School of
Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (24)School of Medicine, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The skin is largely comprised of keratinocytes within the
interfollicular epidermis. Over approximately two weeks these cells differentiate
and traverse the thickness of the skin. The stage of differentiation is therefore
reflected in the positions of cells within the tissue, providing a convenient
axis along which to study the signaling events that occur in situ during
keratinocyte terminal differentiation, over this extended two-week timescale. The
canonical ERK-MAPK signaling cascade (Raf-1, MEK-1/2 and ERK-1/2) has been
implicated in controlling diverse cellular behaviors, including proliferation and
differentiation. While the molecular interactions involved in signal transduction
through this cascade have been well characterized in cell culture experiments,
our understanding of how this sequence of events unfolds to determine cell fate
within a homeostatic tissue environment has not been fully characterized.
METHODS: We measured the abundance of total and phosphorylated ERK-MAPK signaling
proteins within interfollicular keratinocytes in transverse cross-sections of
human epidermis using immunofluorescence microscopy. To investigate these data we
developed a mathematical model of the signaling cascade using a normalized-Hill
differential equation formalism.
RESULTS: These data show coordinated variation in the abundance of phosphorylated
ERK-MAPK components across the epidermis. Statistical analysis of these data
shows that associations between phosphorylated ERK-MAPK components which
correspond to canonical molecular interactions are dependent upon spatial
position within the epidermis. The model demonstrates that the spatial profile of
activation for ERK-MAPK signaling components across the epidermis may be
maintained in a cell-autonomous fashion by an underlying spatial gradient in
calcium signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate an extended phospho-protein profile of ERK-MAPK
signaling cascade components across the epidermis in situ, and statistical
associations in these data indicate canonical ERK-MAPK interactions underlie this
spatial profile of ERK-MAPK activation. Using mathematical modelling we have
demonstrated that spatially varying calcium signaling components across the
epidermis may be sufficient to maintain the spatial profile of ERK-MAPK signaling
cascade components in a cell-autonomous manner. These findings may have
significant implications for the wide range of cancer drugs which therapeutically
target ERK-MAPK signaling components.

PMCID: PMC4514964
PMID: 26209520  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cell Adh Migr. 2015 Jul 24:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Snail promotes cell migration through PI3K/AKT-dependent Rac1 activation as well 
as PI3K/AKT-independent pathways during prostate cancer progression.

Henderson V(1), Smith B, Burton LJ, Randle D, Morris M, Odero-Marah VA.

Author information: 
(1)a Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development; Department of
Biological Sciences ; Clark Atlanta University ; Atlanta , GA USA.

Snail, a zinc-finger transcription factor, induces epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is associated with increased cell migration and
metastasis in cancer cells. Rac1 is a small G-protein which upon activation
results in formation of lamellipodia, the first protrusions formed by migrating
cells. We have previously shown that Snail promotes cell migration through
down-regulation of maspin tumor suppressor. We hypothesized that Snail's
regulation of cell migration may also involve Rac1 signaling regulated by
PI3K/AKT and/or MAPK pathways. We found that Snail overexpression in LNCaP and
22Rv1 prostate cancer cells increased Rac1 activity associated with increased
cell migration, and the Rac1 inhibitor, NSC23766, could inhibit Snail-mediated
cell migration. Conversely, Snail downregulation using shRNA in the aggressive
C4-2 prostate cancer cells decreased Rac1 activity and cell migration. Moreover, 
Snail overexpression increased ERK and PI3K/AKT activity in 22Rv1 prostate cancer
cells. Treatment of Snail-overexpressing 22Rv1 cells with LY294002, PI3K/AKT
inhibitor or U0126, MEK inhibitor, decreased cell migration significantly, but
only LY294002 significantly reduced Rac1 activity, suggesting that Snail promotes
Rac1 activation via the PI3K/AKT pathway. Furthermore, 22Rv1 cells overexpressing
Snail displayed decreased maspin levels, while inhibition of maspin expression in
22Rv1 cells with siRNA, led to increased PI3K/AKT, Rac1 activity and cell
migration, without affecting ERK activity, suggesting that maspin is upstream of 
PI3K/AKT. Overall, we have dissected signaling pathways by which Snail may
promote cell migration through MAPK signaling or alternatively through
PI3K/AKT-Rac1 signaling that involves Snail inhibition of maspin tumor
suppressor. This may contribute to prostate cancer progression.

PMID: 26207671  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul 23. pii: molcanther.0223.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Assessment of the in vivo activity of PI3K and MEK inhibitors in genetically
defined models of colorectal cancer.

Raja M(1), Zverev M(1), Seipel K(2), Williams GT(3), Clarke AR(4), Shaw PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute, Cardiff University. (2)Oncology,
University Hospital Bern. (3)School of Medicine, Cardiff University. (4)Cardiff
University, European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute ClarkeAR@cardiff.ac.uk.

The objective of tailoring medicines for cancer patients according to the
molecular profile of their disease holds great promise for the improvement of
cancer therapy. Nevertheless, this approach has been limited, in part due to the 
lack of predictive and informative pre-clinical studies. Herein, we describe an
assessment of the therapeutic potential of targeting PI3K/mTOR and MAPK
signalling in genetically defined mouse models of colorectal cancer (CRC)
mirroring disease subtypes targeted for novel therapy in the FOCUS4 trial. Our
studies demonstrate that dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition is highly effective in
invasive adenocarcinoma models characterised by combinatorial mutations in Apc
and Pten; Apc and Kras; and Apc, Pten and Kras. MEK inhibition was effective in
the combinatorial Apc and Kras setting, but had no impact in either Apc Pten
mutants or in Apc Pten Kras triple mutants. Furthermore, we describe the
importance of scheduling for combination studies and show that although no
additional benefit is gained in Apc Pten mice, combination of PI3K/mTOR and MAPK 
inhibition leads to an additive benefit in survival in Apc Kras mice and a
synergistic increase in survival in Apc Pten Kras mice. This is the first study
utilising robust CRC GEMMs to support the validity of PI3K/mTOR and MEK
inhibitors as tailored therapies for CRC and highlight the potential importance
of drug scheduling in the clinic.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26206338  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul 23. pii: molcanther.0429.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of wild-type p53-expressing AML by novel small molecule HDM2
inhibitor, CGM097.

Weisberg EL(1), Halilovic E(2), Cooke VG(2), Nonami A(3), Ren T(4), Sanda T(3),
Simkin I(5), Yuan J(2), Antonakos B(2), Barys L(6), Ito M(6), Stone RM(3),
Galinsky I(3), Cowens K(3), Nelson E(3), Sattler M(3), Jeay S(7), Wuerthner
JU(6), McDonough S(3), Wiesmann M(6), Griffin JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute
ellen_weisberg@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)Oncology, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical 
Research, Inc. (3)Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute. (4)National
Screening Laboratory for the Regional Centers of Excellence in Biodefense and
Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, Harvard Medical School. (5)Molecular
Genetics Core, Boston University School of Medicine. (6)Disease Area Oncology,
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc. (7)Oncology, Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research.

The tumor suppressor, p53, is a key regulator of apoptosis and functions upstream
in the apoptotic cascade by both indirectly and directly regulating Bcl-2 family 
proteins. In cells expressing wild-type (wt) p53, the HDM2 protein binds to p53
and blocks its activity. Inhibition of HDM2:p53 interaction activates p53 and
causes apoptosis or cell cycle arrest. Here, we investigated the ability of the
novel HDM2 inhibitor, CGM097, to potently and selectively kill wt p53-expressing 
AML cells. The anti-leukemic effects of CGM097 were studied using cell-based
proliferation assays (human AML cell lines, primary AML patient cells and normal 
bone marrow samples), apoptosis and cell cycle assays, ELISA, immunoblotting, and
an AML patient-derived in vivo mouse model. CGM097 potently and selectively
inhibited the proliferation of human AML cell lines and the majority of primary
AML cells expressing wt p53, but not mutant p53, in a target-specific manner.
Several patient samples that harbored mutant p53 were comparatively unresponsive 
to CGM097. Synergy was observed when CGM097 was combined with FLT3 inhibition
against oncogenic FLT3-expressing cells cultured both in the absence as well as
the presence of cytoprotective stromal-secreted cytokines, as well as when
combined with MEK inhibition in cells with activated MAPK signaling. Finally,
CGM097 was effective in reducing leukemia burden in vivo. These data suggest that
CGM097 is a promising treatment for AML characterized as harboring wt p53 as a
single agent, as well as in combination with other therapies targeting
oncogene-activated pathways that drive AML.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26206331  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015 Jul 24:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergy of molecular targeted approaches and immunotherapy in melanoma:
preclinical basis and clinical perspectives.

Sanlorenzo M(1), Vujic I, Moy A, Quaglino P, Fierro MT, Gammaitoni L,
Carnevale-Schianca F, Aglietta M, Sangiolo D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Dermatology , 
Via Cherasco 23, Torino , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Targeted therapy and immunotherapies are the novel pharmacologic
treatment strategies for metastatic melanoma. BRAF and MEK inhibitors effectively
block the hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway in BRAF mutant melanomas and also
have several other effects on melanoma cells and on the immune response. The aim 
of this work is to discuss the rationale, evidence and perspectives of approaches
combining target and immunotherapy against melanoma. Areas covered: We first
review the effects of BRAF and MEK inhibitors on melanoma cells and on the
different components of the immune system. Afterwards, we summarize the results
of the preclinical and clinical studies that have combined targeted therapy and
immunotherapy for the treatment of melanoma. Expert opinion: Clinical
applications of immunotherapy strategies have recently changed the therapeutic
mainstay for metastatic melanoma. Biologic and initial preclinical data support
their integration with innovative molecular targeted therapies, opening enormous 
perspectives for researchers in the effort of finding a definitive cure. Main
open challenges are the definition of reliable research models, assessment of
effective schedules, safety issues and designing of personalized approaches.

PMID: 26206099  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jul 23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29698. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of class I histone deacetylases by romidepsin potently induces
Epstein-Barr virus lytic cycle and mediates enhanced cell death with ganciclovir.

Hui KF(1), Cheung AK(2), Choi CK(1), Yeung PL(1), Middeldorp JM(3), Lung
ML(2,)(4), Tsao SW(5,)(4), Chiang AK(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Department of
Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Center for
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Research, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China. (5)Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, which inhibit eleven HDAC isoforms,
are widely used to induce EBV lytic cycle in EBV-associated cancers in vitro and 
in clinical trials. Here, we hypothesized that inhibition of one or several
specific HDAC isoforms by selective HDAC inhibitors could potently induce EBV
lytic cycle in EBV-associated malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)
and gastric carcinoma (GC). We found that inhibition of class I HDACs,
particularly HDAC-1, -2 and -3, was sufficient to induce EBV lytic cycle in NPC
and GC cells in vitro and in vivo. Among a panel of selective HDAC inhibitors,
the FDA-approved HDAC inhibitor romidepsin was found to be the most potent lytic 
inducer, which could activate EBV lytic cycle at â¼0.5 to 5 nM (versus â¼800 nM
achievable concentration in patients' plasma) in more than 75% of cells.
Up-regulation of p21(WAF1) , which is negatively regulated by class I HDACs was
observed prior to the induction of EBV lytic cycle. The up-regulation of
p21(WAF1) and induction of lytic cycle were abrogated by a specific inhibitor of 
PKC-Î´ but not the inhibitors of PI3K, MEK, p38 MAPK, JNK, or ATM pathways.
Interestingly, inhibition of HDAC-1, -2 and -3 by romidepsin or shRNA knockdown
could confer susceptibility of EBV-positive epithelial cells to the treatment
with ganciclovir. In conclusion, we demonstrated that inhibition of class I HDACs
by romidepsin could potently induce EBV lytic cycle and mediate enhanced cell
death with ganciclovir, suggesting potential application of romidepsin for the
treatment of EBV-associated cancers. This article is protected by copyright. All 
rights reserved.

Â© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 26205347  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 22. pii: clincanres.0393.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Cellular mechanisms underlying complete hematological response of chronic myeloid
leukemia to BRAF/MEK inhibition in a patient with concomitant metastatic
melanoma.

Andrews MC(1), Turner N(2), Boyd J(3), Roberts AW(4), Grigg A(5), Behren A(1),
Cebon JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunobiology Laboratory, Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute.
(2)Systems Biology and Personalized Medicine, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research. (3)Clinical Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Royal 
Melbourne Hospital. (4)Clinical Haematology and BMT service, The Royal Melbourne 
Hospital. (5)Haematology, Austin Health. (6)Cancer Immunobiology Laboratory,
Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute jonathan.cebon@onjcri.org.au.

PURPOSE: Targeted MEK inhibition is an emerging therapy in a number of solid
tumors. It holds particular promise in BRAF V600E mutation-positive malignant
melanoma, where constitutive activation and cell growth through the MAP kinase
(MAPK) pathway is well established. In vitro and pre-clinical research indicates 
that MAPK pathway activation is important in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
leukemogenesis however the potential of MEK inhibition has not yet been
investigated clinically in the setting of such hematological malignancies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We report a case of complete hematological response of CML
to MEK inhibition in a patient with synchronous metastatic melanoma, who received
treatment with combination BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitors. We studied the effects of 
these agents on proliferation and outgrowth of myeloid precursors, and
longitudinal shifts in peripheral blood phenotyping during the course of
treatment. A model cell line system was used to examine the effects of dabrafenib
and trametinib on MAPK and BCR-ABL1-signalling.
RESULTS: After 35 weeks on treatment with BRAF and MEK inhibitors, complete
hematologic response was observed without recourse to BCR-ABL1-targeted therapy. 
MEK inhibition was principally responsible for impaired proliferation of both
mature and primitive myeloid precursors, as well as growth and hemoglobinization 
of erythroid precursors. Paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway was seen in
response to BRAF inhibitor therapy but this was easily overcome by
clinically-relevant doses of concurrent MEK inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that further evaluation of the optimal MAPK
targeting approach is warranted to extend therapeutic options in CML.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26202951  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Exp Med. 2015 Jul 27;212(8):1323-36. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150110. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

T cell development involves TRAF3IP3-mediated ERK signaling in the Golgi.

Zou Q(1), Jin J(1), Xiao Y(1), Hu H(1), Zhou X(1), Jie Z(1), Xie X(1), Li JY(2), 
Cheng X(1), Sun SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030. (2)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030. (3)Department of
Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030 
The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030
ssun@mdanderson.org.

Generation of T lymphocytes in the thymus is guided by signal transduction from
the T cell receptor (TCR), but the underlying mechanism is incompletely
understood. Here we have identified a Golgi-associated factor, TRAF3-interacting 
protein 3 (TRAF3IP3), as a crucial mediator of thymocyte development. TRAF3IP3
deficiency in mice attenuates the generation of mature thymocytes caused by
impaired thymocyte-positive selection. TRAF3IP3 mediates TCR-stimulated
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and its upstream kinase mitogen/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (MEK). Interestingly, TRAF3IP3 exerts this signaling
function through recruiting MEK to the Golgi and, thereby, facilitating the
interaction of MEK with its activator BRAF. Transgenic expression of a
constitutively active MEK rescues the T cell development block in Traf3ip3
knockout mice. These findings establish TRAF3IP3 as a novel regulator of T cell
development and suggest a Golgi-specific ERK signaling mechanism that regulates
thymocyte development.

Â© 2015 Zou et al.

PMID: 26195727  [PubMed - in process]


10. Discov Med. 2015 Jun;19(107):455-61.

Novel mechanisms and therapeutic approaches in melanoma: targeting the MAPK
pathway.

Grimaldi AM(1), Simeone E, Festino L, Vanella V, Palla M, Ascierto PA.

Author information: 
(1)O.U. Melanoma, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, National Cancer 
Institute of Naples "G. Pascale" Foundation, Naples, Italy.

The development of novel treatments that selectively inhibit the RAS-RAF-MAPK
pathway represents a milestone in the history of melanoma treatment. BRAF
mutations occur in approximately 45% of cutaneous melanomas, while mutations in
NRAS occur in 15-25%. Vemurafenib was the first BRAF inhibitor to be approved in 
2011, based on the results of a phase III trial (BRIM-3) that showed higher
progression-free survival and overall survival compared with dacarbazine
chemotherapy in metastatic BRAF-mutated melanoma. Dabrafenib, another BRAF
inhibitor, has shown similar results and was approved in 2013. Preclinical
studies suggested that another novel group of agents, the MEK inhibitors, showed 
stronger inhibition of both mutated BRAF and NRAS cell cultures than vemurafenib.
Trametinib was the first MEK inhibitor approved in 2014, both as a single agent
and in combination with dabrafenib for the treatment of advanced BRAF-mutated
melanoma. Other MEK inhibitors are also in development. Concomitant inhibition of
both MEK and BRAF has shown more durable and greater tumor response than BRAF
monotherapy, by overcoming the multiple genetic mechanisms of escape. Combined
therapy prevents the development of acquired resistance as well as decreasing
cutaneous toxicity secondary to paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway
induced by BRAF inhibitors. Various combinations of BRAF and MEK inhibitors have 
shown promising results. Moreover, triple combination therapies involved other
agents with novel mechanisms of action are also being evaluated. These and other 
combination strategies involving immunotherapies and targeted therapies offer the
hope of improving outcomes beyond those already achieved with anti-BRAF
treatments.

PMID: 26175403  [PubMed - in process]


11. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jul;10(1):502-508. Epub 2015 May 4.

Type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase inhibits Rac1
activation in gastric cancer cells.

Wang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Wu M(1), Lan T(1), Wu Y(1), Li Y(1), Qian H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China.

Enhanced motility of cancer cells is a critical step in promoting tumor
metastasis, which remains the major cause of gastric cancer-associated mortality.
The small GTPase Rac1 is a key signaling component in the regulation of cell
migration. Previous studies have demonstrated that Rac1 activity may be regulated
by protein kinase G (PKG); however, the underlying mechanism is not yet clear.
The current study aimed to investigate the effect of type II cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKG II) on Rac1 activity. The
human gastric cancer cell line AGS was infected with adenoviral constructs
encoding PKG II to increase the expression of this enzyme, and treated with a
cGMP analog (8-pCPT-cGMP) to induce its activation. A Transwell assay was
employed to measure cell migration, and the activity of Rac1 was assessed using a
pull-down assay. Immunoprecipitation was used to isolate the Rac1 protein.
Phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate 3 kinase (PI3K) and its 
downstream effecter protein kinase B (Akt) are associated with lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA)-induced motility/migration of cancer cells. Extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK) is the major signaling molecule of the Mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK) mediated signaling pathway. ERK and its upstream activator 
MAPK kinase (MEK) are also involved in LPA-induced motility/migration of cancer
cells. Phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK and enriched Rac1 were detected by
western blotting. The results revealed that blocking the activation of Rac1 by
ectopically expressing an inactive Rac1 mutant (T17N) impeded LPA-induced cell
migration. Increased PKG II activity inhibited LPA-induced migration and
LPA-induced activation of Rac1; however, it had no effect on the phosphorylation 
of Rac1. PKG II also inhibited the activation of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated
signaling, which is important for LPA-induced Rac1 activation. These results
suggest that PKG II affects LPA-stimulated migration of AGS cells by blocking
Rac1 activation, via inhibition of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated signaling.

PMCID: PMC4487129
PMID: 26171059  [PubMed]


12. Cell Signal. 2015 Jul 11. pii: S0898-6568(15)00199-0. doi:
10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.06.007. [Epub ahead of print]

The mechanism and function of mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by
ARF1.

Zhou F(1), Dong C(1), Davis JE(2), Wu WH(2), Surrao K(2), Wu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido St, New Orleans, LA 70112, United
States. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, 1459 Laney Walker Blvd., Augusta, GA 30912, United
States. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido St, New Orleans, LA 70112, 
United States; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, 1459 Laney Walker Blvd., Augusta, GA 30912, 
United States. Electronic address: guwu@gru.edu.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) can be activated by a number of
biochemical pathways through distinct signaling molecules. We have recently
revealed a novel function for the Ras-like small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 1
(ARF1) in mediating the activation of Raf1-MEK-ERK1/2 pathway by G
protein-coupled receptors [Dong C, Li C and Wu G (2011) J Biol Chem 286,
43,361-43,369]. Here, we have further defined the underlying mechanism and the
possible function of ARF1-mediated MAPK pathway. We demonstrated that the
blockage of ARF1 activation and the disruption of ARF1 localization to the Golgi 
by mutating Thr48, a highly conserved residue involved in the exchange of GDP for
GTP, and the myristoylation site Gly2 abolished ARF1's ability to activate
ERK1/2. In addition, treatment with Golgi structure disrupting agents markedly
attenuated ARF1-mediated ERK1/2 activation. Furthermore, ARF1 significantly
promoted cell proliferation. More interestingly, ARF1 activated 90kDa ribosomal
S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) without influencing Elk-1 activation and ERK2 translocation to
the nuclei. These data demonstrate that, once activated, ARF1 activates the MAPK 
pathway likely using the Golgi as a main platform, which in turn activates the
cytoplasmic RSK1, leading to cell proliferation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26169956  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Radiother Oncol. 2015 Jul 8. pii: S0167-8140(15)00323-0. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2015.06.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Trametinib radiosensitises RAS- and BRAF-mutated melanoma by perturbing cell
cycle and inducing senescence.

Schick U(1), Kyula J(1), Barker H(1), Patel R(1), Zaidi S(1), Gregory C(1), Hafsi
H(1), Roulstone V(1), Deutsch E(2), McLaughlin M(1), Harrington K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (2)INSERM UMR 1030, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (3)Targeted
Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: Kevin.Harrington@icr.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Radiotherapy (RT) is used frequently in patients with melanoma, but
results are suboptimal because the disease is often radioresistant. This may be
due to constitutive activation of MAPK pathway signalling through mutations
involving RAS/RAF. Thus, we studied whether trametinib, a potent and selective
allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/2 could improve the efficacy of RT.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Clonogenic survival assays were performed in human
BRAF-mutant (A375), NRAS-mutant (D04, WM1631), KRAS-mutant (WM1791c) and
wild-type (PMWK) melanoma cell lines. The effects of trametinib with and without 
radiation on protein levels of MEK effectors were measured by immunoblot
analyses. Cell cycle effects, DNA damage repair, mitotic catastrophe and
senescence were measured using flow cytometry, Î³H2Ax staining, nuclear
fragmentation and Î²-galactosidase staining, respectively. Additionally, athymic
mice with D04 flank tumours were treated with fractionated RT after gavage with
trametinib and monitored for tumour growth.
RESULTS: All cell lines, except PMWK, exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity when RT was
combined with trametinib compared to either agent alone. Sensitiser enhancement
ratios were 1.70, 1.32, 1.10, and 1.70 for A375, D04, WM1361 and WM1791c,
respectively. Trametinib efficiently blocked RT-induced phosphorylation of ERK at
nanomolar concentrations. Increased radiosensitivity correlated with prolonged G1
arrest and reduction in the radioresistant S phase up to 48h following RT. A
larger population of senescence-activated Î²-galactosidase-positive cells was seen
in the trametinib pretreated group, and this correlated with activation of two of
the major mediators of induced senescence, p53 and pRb. Mice receiving the
combination treatment (trametinib 1mg/kg and RT over 3days) showed a reduced mean
tumour volume compared with mice receiving trametinib alone (p=0.016), or RT
alone (p=0.047). No overt signs of drug toxicity were observed.
CONCLUSION: Trametinib radiosensitised RAS-/RAF-mutated melanoma cells by
inducing prolonged G1 arrest and premature senescence. In this pre-clinical study
we demonstrate that combining trametinib and RT is well tolerated, and reduces
tumour growth in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26163092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):15814-27.

A MEK/PI3K/HDAC inhibitor combination therapy for KRAS mutant pancreatic cancer
cells.

Ischenko I(1), Petrenko O(1), Hayman MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly aggressive, metastatic
disease with limited treatment options. Factors contributing to the metastatic
predisposition and therapy resistance in pancreatic cancer are not well
understood. Here, we used a mouse model of KRAS-driven pancreatic carcinogenesis 
to define distinct subtypes of PDAC metastasis: epithelial, mesenchymal and
quasi-mesenchymal. We examined pro-survival signals in these cells and the
therapeutic response differences between them. Our data indicate that the
initiation and maintenance of the transformed state are separable, and that KRAS 
dependency is not a fundamental constant of KRAS-initiated tumors. Moreover, some
cancer cells can shuttle between the KRAS dependent (drug-sensitive) and
independent (drug-tolerant) states and thus escape extinction. We further
demonstrate that inhibition of KRAS signaling alone via co-targeting the MAPK and
PI3K pathways fails to induce extensive tumor cell death and, therefore, has
limited efficacy against PDAC. However, the addition of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors greatly improves outcomes, reduces the self-renewal of cancer
cells, and blocks cancer metastasis in vivo. Our results suggest that targeting
HDACs in combination with KRAS or its effector pathways provides an effective
strategy for the treatment of PDAC.

PMID: 26158412  [PubMed - in process]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3855-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510733112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

EGFR inhibition evokes innate drug resistance in lung cancer cells by preventing 
Akt activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function.

Phuchareon J(1), McCormick F(2), Eisele DW(1), Tetsu O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), CA 94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. (2)UCSF Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu. (3)Head and
Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), CA
94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu.

Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
About 14% of NSCLCs harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 
Despite remarkable progress in treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
only 5% of patients achieve tumor reduction >90%. The limited primary responses
are attributed partly to drug resistance inherent in the tumor cells before
therapy begins. Recent reports showed that activation of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) is an important determinant of this innate drug resistance. In
contrast, we demonstrate that EGFR inhibition promotes innate drug resistance
despite blockade of RTK activity in NSCLC cells. EGFR TKIs decrease both the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt protein kinase pathways for a
short time, after which the Ras/MAPK pathway becomes reactivated. Akt inhibition 
selectively blocks the transcriptional activation of Ets-1, which inhibits its
target gene, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a negative regulator
specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated. Furthermore, elevated
c-Src stimulates Ras GTP-loading and activates Raf and MEK kinases. These
observations suggest that not only ERK1/2 but also Akt activity is essential to
maintain Ets-1 in an active state. Therefore, despite high levels of ERK1/2,
Ets-1 target genes including DUSP6 and cyclins D1, D3, and E2 remain suppressed
by Akt inhibition. Reduction of DUSP6 in combination with elevated c-Src renews
activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway, which enhances cell survival by accelerating 
Bim protein turnover. Thus, EGFR TKIs evoke innate drug resistance by preventing 
Akt activity and inactivating Ets-1 function in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 26150526  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 2. pii: jbc.M114.634162. [Epub ahead of print]

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors Sensitize a MAPK-Linked Toxicity Pathway on
Prolonged Exposure to Î²-Amyloid.

Arora K(1), Cheng J(1), Nichols RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hawaii, United States. (2)University of Hawaii, United States
robert.nichols@hawaii.edu.

Among putative downstream synaptic targets of Î²-amyloid (AÎ²) are signaling
molecules involved in synaptic function, memory formation and cognition, such as 
the MAP kinases, MKPs, CaMKII, CREB, Fyn and Tau. Here, we assessed the
activation and interaction of signaling pathways upon prolonged exposure to AÎ² in
model nerve cells expressing nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). Our goal
was to characterize the steps underlying sensitization of the nerve cells to
neurotoxicity when AÎ²-target receptors are present. Of particular focus was the
connection of the activated signaling molecules to oxidative stress.
Differentiated neuroblastoma cells expressing mouse Î±4Î²2-nAChRs were exposed to
AÎ²1-42 for intervals from 30 min to 3 days. The cells and cell-derived protein
extracts were then probed for activation of signaling pathway molecules (ERK,
JNK, CaMKII, CREB, MARCKS, Fyn, tau). Our results show substantial, progressive
activation of ERK in response to nanomolar AÎ² exposure, starting at the earliest 
time point. Increased ERK activation was followed by JNK activation as well as an
increased expression of PHF-tau, paralleled by increased levels of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). The impact of prolonged AÎ² on the levels of pERK, pJNK and 
ROS was attenuated by MEK-selective and JNK-selective inhibitors. In addition,
the MEK inhibitor as well as a JNK inhibitor attenuated AÎ²-induced nuclear
fragmentation, which followed the changes in ROS levels. These results
demonstrate that the presence of nAChRs sensitizes neurons to the neurotoxic
action of AÎ² through the timed activation of discrete intracellular signaling
molecules, suggesting pathways involved in the early stages of Alzheimers
disease.

Copyright Â© 2015, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26139609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Transl Med. 2015 Jul 3;13(1):210. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0581-2.

Vemurafenib resistance reprograms melanoma cells towards glutamine dependence.

Hernandez-Davies JE(1), Tran TQ(2), Reid MA(3), Rosales KR(4), Lowman XH(5), Pan 
M(6), Moriceau G(7,)(8), Yang Y(9), Wu J(10), Lo RS(11,)(12), Kong M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. jedavies@coh.org. (2)Department of Cancer 
Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA,
91010, USA. thatran@coh.org. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. mreida@coh.org. 
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. krosales@coh.org. (5)Department of Cancer 
Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA,
91010, USA. xlowman@coh.org. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. Minoan@coh.org. 
(7)Division of Dermatology/Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
gmoriceau@mednet.ucla.edu. (8)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
gmoriceau@mednet.ucla.edu. (9)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. yiyang@coh.org. 
(10)Animal Tumor Model Program, Division of Comparative Medicine, Beckman
Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.
jwu@coh.org. (11)Division of Dermatology/Department of Medicine, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
rlo@mednet.ucla.edu. (12)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
rlo@mednet.ucla.edu. (13)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute
of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. mekong@coh.org.

BACKGROUND: (V600) BRAF mutations drive approximately 50% of metastatic melanoma 
which can be therapeutically targeted by BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) and, based on
resistance mechanisms, the combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors (BRAFi + MEKi).
Although the combination therapy has been shown to provide superior clinical
benefits, acquired resistance is still prevalent and limits the overall survival 
benefits. Recent work has shown that oncogenic changes can lead to alterations in
tumor cell metabolism rendering cells addicted to nutrients, such as the amino
acid glutamine. Here, we evaluated whether melanoma cells with acquired
resistance display glutamine dependence and whether glutamine metabolism can be a
potential molecular target to treat resistant cells.
METHODS: Isogenic BRAFi sensitive parental (V600) BRAF mutant melanoma cell lines
and resistant (derived by chronic treatment with vemurafenib) sub-lines were used
to assess differences in the glutamine uptake and sensitivity to glutamine
deprivation. To evaluate a broader range of resistance mechanisms, isogenic pairs
where the sub-lines were resistant to BRAFi + MEKi were also studied. Since
resistant cells demonstrated increased sensitivity to glutamine deficiency, we
used glutaminase inhibitors BPTES [bis-2-(5 phenylacetamido-1, 2,
4-thiadiazol-2-yl) ethyl sulfide] and L-L-DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) to
treat MAPK pathway inhibitor (MAPKi) resistant cell populations both in vitro and
in vivo.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that MAPKi-acquired resistant cells uptook greater
amounts of glutamine and have increased sensitivity to glutamine deprivation than
their MAPKi-sensitive counterparts. In addition, it was found that both BPTES and
L-DON were more effective at decreasing cell survival of MAPKi-resistant
sub-lines than parental cell populations in vitro. We also showed that mutant
NRAS was critical for glutamine addiction in mutant NRAS driven resistance. When 
tested in vivo, we found that xenografts derived from resistant cells were more
sensitive to BPTES or L-DON treatment than those derived from parental cells.
CONCLUSION: Our study is a proof-of-concept for the potential of targeting
glutamine metabolism as an alternative strategy to suppress acquired
MAPKi-resistance in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4490757
PMID: 26139106  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17178-91.

Radiosensitization and downregulation of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
K (hnRNP K) upon inhibition of mitogen/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(MEK) in malignant melanoma cells.

Eder S(1), Lamkowski A(1), Priller M(1), Port M(1), Steinestel K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bundeswehr Institute of Radiobiology, 80937 Munich, Germany.
(2)Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149
Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP K) is an important
cofactor in the p53-mediated DNA damage response pathway upon ionizing radiation 
(IR) and exerts anti-apoptotic effects also independent of p53 pathway
activation. Furthermore, hnRNP K is overexpressed in various neoplasms including 
malignant melanoma (MM). Here, we investigate the role of hnRNP K in the
radioresistance of MM cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Our results show cytoplasmic expression of hnRNP K in human 
MM surgical specimens, but not in benign nevi, and a quick dose- and
time-dependent upregulation in response to IR accompanied by cytoplasmic
redistribution of the protein in the IPC-298 cellular tumor model carrying an
activating NRAS mutation (p.Q61L). SiRNA-based knockdown of hnRNP K induced a
delayed decline in Î³H2AX/53BP1-positive DNA repair foci upon IR. Pharmacological 
interference with MAPK signaling abrogated ERK phosphorylation, diminished
cellular hnRNP K levels, impaired Î³H2AX/53BP1-foci repair and proliferative
capability and increased apoptosis comparable to the observed hnRNP K knockdown
phenotype in IPC-298 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that pharmacological interference with MAPK
signaling increases vulnerability of NRAS-mutant malignant melanoma cells to
ionizing radiation along with downregulation of endogenous hnRNP K and point
towards a possible use for combined MEK inhibition and localized radiation
therapy of MM in the NRAS-mutant setting where BRAF inhibitors offer no clinical 
benefit.

PMID: 26136337  [PubMed - in process]


19. Immunology. 2015 Jul 1. doi: 10.1111/imm.12501. [Epub ahead of print]

H-ficolin binds Aspergillus fumigatus leading to activation of the lectin
complement pathway and modulation of lung epithelial immune responses.

Bidula S(1,)(2), Sexton DW(1,)(3), Yates M(1), Abdolrasouli A(4), Shah A(4),
Wallis R(5), Reed A(6), Armstrong-James D(4), Schelenz S(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia,
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK. (2)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of 
Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK. (3)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Science, Liverpool
John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK. (4)Section of
Infectious Diseases and Immunity, Imperial College London, Flowers Building,
Armstrong Road, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. (5)Departments of Infection, Immunity and
Inflammation and Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Henry Wellcome Building, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK. (6)Department of Lung Transplantation,
Harefield Hospital, Hill End Road, Middlesex, UB9 6JH, UK. (7)Department of
Microbiology, Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London, SW3 6NP, UK.

Aspergillus fumigatus is an opportunistic fungal pathogen that typically infects 
the lungs of immunocompromised patients leading to a high mortality. H-ficolin,
an innate immune opsonin, is produced by type II alveolar epithelial cells and
could participate in lung defences against infections. Here, we utilised the
human type II alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, to determine the involvement
of H-ficolin in fungal defence. Additionally, we investigated the presence of
H-ficolin in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) from transplant patients during
pneumonia. H-ficolin exhibited demonstrable binding to A. fumigatus conidia via
L-fucose, D-mannose and N-acetylglucosamine residues in a calcium- and
pH-dependent manner. Moreover, recognition led to lectin complement pathway
activation and enhanced fungal association with A549 cells. Following
recognition, H-ficolin opsonization manifested an increase in IL-8 production
from A549 cells which involved activation of the intracellular signalling
pathways MEK 1/2, p38 MAPK and JNK. Finally, H-ficolin concentrations were
significantly higher in BAL of patients with lung infections compared to control 
subjects (n=16; p=0.00726). ROC curve analysis further highlighted the potential 
of H-ficolin as a diagnostic marker for lung infection (AUC=0.77; p<0.0001).
Thus, H-ficolin participates in A. fumigatus defence via activation of the lectin
complement pathway, enhanced fungal-host interactions and modulated immune
responses. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26133042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5553-8. eCollection 2015.

The role of leptin in the ventricular remodeling process and its mechanism.

Zuo G(1), Du X(1), Zheng L(1), Wang C(1), Wang K(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Fifth Central Hospital No. 41 Zhejiang Road,
Tianjin 300450, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the role of leptin in the ventricular
remodeling process and its mechanism in the diabetic rats' model.
METHODS: The diabetic SD rats model induced by streptozotocin was established.
The SD rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: control group (20 rats treated
with citric acid/sodium citrate buffer); M0 group (10 rats treated with
physiological saline); M1 group (10 rats treated with 50 Î¼g/kg LP); M2 group (10 
rats treated with 100 Î¼g/kg LP). Ang-II was detected by ELISA. The expression
levels of LP and Ob-Rb were detected by RT-PCR. MAPK phosphorylation changes were
detected by western blotting. Myocardial morphology was observed.
RESULTS: Compared with control group, the blood glucose concentration and Ang-II 
significantly increased in diabetic model groups (P < 0.01) and body weight
decreased (P < 0.05). The expression levels of LP and Ob-Rb increased and heart
function decreased in diabetic model groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LP may be involved in the myocardial cell hypertrophy through the
neuroendocrine system and associated with the JAK-STAT, Ras-Raf-MEK-MAPK and
PI-3K signaling pathway, which provides a new concept for the pathogenesis of
cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC4483875
PMID: 26131137  [PubMed]
R and the MAPK/MNK
pathway in PCa cells maintains a defined translational level of specific mRNAs
required for ribosome biogenesis, cell proliferation and stress response and
might confer to these cells the ability to overcome negative insults.

PMID: 18809972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1681. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2687.

Structure of ERK2 bound to PEA-15 reveals a mechanism for rapid release of
activated MAPK.

Mace PD(1), Wallez Y, Egger MF, Dobaczewska MK, Robinson H, Pasquale EB, Riedl
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Apoptosis and Cell Death Research, Cancer Center, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

ERK1/2 kinases are the principal effectors of a central signalling cascade that
converts extracellular stimuli into cell proliferation and migration responses
and, when deregulated, can promote cell oncogenic transformation. The scaffolding
protein PEA-15 is a death effector domain protein that directly interacts with
ERK1/2 and affects ERK1/2 subcellular localization and phosphorylation. Here, to 
understand this ERK1/2 signalling complex, we have solved the crystal structures 
of PEA-15 bound to three different ERK2 phospho-conformers. The structures reveal
that PEA-15 uses a bipartite binding mode, occupying two key docking sites of
ERK2. Remarkably, PEA-15 can efficiently bind the ERK2 activation loop in the
critical Thr-X-Tyr region in different phosphorylation states. PEA-15 binding
triggers an extended allosteric conduit in dually phosphorylated ERK2, disrupting
key features of active ERK2. At the same time PEA-15 binding protects ERK2 from
dephosphorylation, thus setting the stage for immediate ERK activity upon its
release from the PEA-15 inhibitory complex.

PMCID: PMC3640864
PMID: 23575685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Signal. 2012 Oct 9;5(245):ra74. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003004.

Specificity of linear motifs that bind to a common mitogen-activated protein
kinase docking groove.

Garai Ã(1), Zeke A, GÃ³gl G, TÃ¶rÅ I, FÃ¶rdÅs F, Blankenburg H, BÃ¡rkai T, Varga J,
Alexa A, Emig D, Albrecht M, RemÃ©nyi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, EÃ¶tvÃ¶s LorÃ¡nd University, PÃ¡zmÃ¡ny PÃ©ter sÃ©tÃ¡ny
1/C, 1117 Budapest, Hungary.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) have a docking groove that interacts
with linear "docking" motifs in binding partners. To determine the structural
basis of binding specificity between MAPKs and docking motifs, we quantitatively 
analyzed the ability of 15 docking motifs from diverse MAPK partners to bind to
c-Jun amino-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1), p38Î±, and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 2 (ERK2). Classical docking motifs mediated highly specific binding only
to JNK1, and only those motifs with a sequence pattern distinct from the
classical MAPK binding docking motif consensus differentiated between the
topographically similar docking grooves of ERK and p38Î±. Crystal structures of
four complexes of MAPKs with docking peptides, representing JNK-specific,
ERK-specific, or ERK- and p38-selective binding modes, revealed that the regions 
located between consensus positions in the docking motifs showed conformational
diversity. Although the consensus positions in the docking motifs served as
anchor points that bound to common MAPK surface features and mostly contributed
to docking in a nondiscriminatory fashion, the conformation of the intervening
region between the anchor points mostly determined specificity. We designed
peptides with tailored MAPK binding profiles by rationally changing the length
and amino acid composition of intervening regions located between anchor points. 
These results suggest a coherent structural model for MAPK docking specificity
that reveals how short linear motifs binding to a common kinase docking groove
can mediate diverse interaction patterns and contribute to correct MAPK partner
selection in signaling networks.

PMCID: PMC3500698
PMID: 23047924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci Signal. 2011 Dec 20;4(204):ra88. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002241.

A distinct interaction mode revealed by the crystal structure of the kinase p38Î± 
with the MAPK binding domain of the phosphatase MKP5.

Zhang YY(1), Wu JW, Wang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Protein Science, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades play a pivotal role in a
myriad of cellular functions. The specificity and efficiency of MAPK signaling
are controlled by docking interactions between MAPKs and their cognate proteins. 
Many MAPK-interacting partners, including substrates, MAPK kinases, phosphatases,
and scaffolding proteins, have linear sequence motifs that mediate the
interaction with the common docking site on MAPKs. We report the crystal
structure of p38Î± in complex with the MAPK binding domain (KBD) from MAPK
phosphatase 5 (MKP5) at 2.7 Ã resolution. In contrast to the well-known docking
mode, the KBD binds p38Î± in a bipartite manner, in which two distinct helical
regions of KBD engage the p38Î± docking site, which is situated on the back of the
p38Î± active site. We also determined the crystal structure of the KBD of MKP7,
which closely resembles the MKP5 KBD, suggesting that the mechanism of molecular 
recognition by the KBD of MKP5 is conserved in the cytoplasmic p38- and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase-specific MKP subgroup. This previously unknown binding mode
provides new insights into how MAPKs interact with their binding partners to
achieve functional specificity.

PMID: 22375048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Structure. 2003 Feb;11(2):155-64.

Solution structure of the MAPK phosphatase PAC-1 catalytic domain. Insights into 
substrate-induced enzymatic activation of MKP.

Farooq A(1), Plotnikova O, Chaturvedi G, Yan S, Zeng L, Zhang Q, Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

Comment in
    Structure. 2003 Feb;11(2):131-2.

Inactivation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by MAPK phosphatases
(MKPs) is accomplished via substrate-induced activation of the latter enzymes;
however, the structural basis for the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here,
we report the three-dimensional solution structure of the C-terminal phosphatase 
domain of the prototypical MKP PAC-1, determined when bound to phosphate.
Structural and biochemical analyses reveal unique active site geometry of the
enzyme important for binding to phosphorylated threonine and tyrosine of MAPK
ERK2. Our study further demonstrates that the dynamic interaction between the
N-terminal kinase binding domain and the C-terminal phosphatase domain of an MKP 
is directly coupled to MAPK-induced conformational change of the phosphatase
active site, which is essential for eliciting its full enzymatic activity.

PMID: 12575935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cancer. 2015 Jul 28. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29586. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinicopathologic features associated with efficacy and long-term survival in
metastatic melanoma patients treated with BRAF or combined BRAF and MEK
inhibitors.

Menzies AM(1,)(2,)(3), Wilmott JS(1,)(2), Drummond M(1,)(2), Lo S(1,)(2), Lyle
M(1,)(2), Chan MM(4), Thompson JF(1,)(2,)(5,)(6), Guminski A(1,)(2,)(3), Carlino 
MS(1,)(2,)(4), Scolyer RA(1,)(2,)(5), Kefford RF(1,)(2,)(4,)(7), Long GV(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, Australia. (2)The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia. (3)Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (4)Crown
Princess Mary Cancer Centre, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (5)Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (6)Mater Hospital, Sydney, Australia. 
(7)Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The degree of response and the duration of survival of patients
treated with mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors are highly
variable. Whether baseline clinicopathologic factors can predict the clinical
course with treatment is largely unknown.
METHODS: For 142 consecutive immunotherapy- and MAPK inhibitor-naive patients
with BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma who were treated during clinical trials with
BRAF inhibitors (n = 111) or a combination of dabrafenib and trametinib (n = 31),
clinicopathologic factors were correlated with the response to MAPK inhibitors
and survival.
RESULTS: The median follow-up was 15.7 months (range, 0.6-60.5 months). The 2-,
3-, and 4-year overall survival (OS) rates were 43%, 24%, and 24%, respectively. 
A multivariate analysis demonstrated that the only clinicopathologic factors
associated with longer progression-free survival (PFS) and OS were female sex and
a normal pretreatment serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level. The BRAF V600E
genotype and an absence of primary melanoma ulceration were also independently
associated with longer PFS but not OS. The median OS was 23.5 months for patients
with normal LDH levels and 7.3 months for those with elevated LDH levels (hazard 
ratio, 0.31; P < .001). Complete responders had the best survival, but disease
progression still occurred in 2 of 7 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival occurs for a minority of patients receiving MAPK 
inhibitor treatment alone. Sex, serum LDH, BRAF genotype, and primary melanoma
ulceration status are independent factors associated with treatment outcomes.
Patients with a complete response to treatment have the best survival, but
relapses still occur. Cancer 2015. Â© 2015 American Cancer Society.

Â© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26218930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Jul 25;9:41. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0187-6.

Regulation of ERK-MAPK signaling in human epidermis.

Cursons J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Gao J(6), Hurley DG(7,)(8,)(9,)(10,)(11,)(12),
Print CG(13,)(14,)(15), Dunbar PR(16,)(17), Jacobs MD(18), Crampin
EJ(19,)(20,)(21,)(22,)(23,)(24).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (2)NICTA Victoria
Research Lab, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (3)ARC Centre 
of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of 
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (4)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (5)Maurice
Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (6)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
jerry.gao@unimelb.edu.au. (7)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (8)NICTA Victoria Research Lab, Melbourne,
Australia. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (9)Auckland Bioengineering Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au.
(10)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (11)Bioinformatics Institute, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (12)Faculty of
Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (13)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (14)Bioinformatics Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz.
(15)Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (16)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (17)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (18)Department of Biology, New Zealand International
College, ACG New Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand. marc.jacobs@gmx.com. (19)Systems
Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (20)ARC Centre of Excellence
in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.
(21)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (22)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (23)School of
Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (24)School of Medicine, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The skin is largely comprised of keratinocytes within the
interfollicular epidermis. Over approximately two weeks these cells differentiate
and traverse the thickness of the skin. The stage of differentiation is therefore
reflected in the positions of cells within the tissue, providing a convenient
axis along which to study the signaling events that occur in situ during
keratinocyte terminal differentiation, over this extended two-week timescale. The
canonical ERK-MAPK signaling cascade (Raf-1, MEK-1/2 and ERK-1/2) has been
implicated in controlling diverse cellular behaviors, including proliferation and
differentiation. While the molecular interactions involved in signal transduction
through this cascade have been well characterized in cell culture experiments,
our understanding of how this sequence of events unfolds to determine cell fate
within a homeostatic tissue environment has not been fully characterized.
METHODS: We measured the abundance of total and phosphorylated ERK-MAPK signaling
proteins within interfollicular keratinocytes in transverse cross-sections of
human epidermis using immunofluorescence microscopy. To investigate these data we
developed a mathematical model of the signaling cascade using a normalized-Hill
differential equation formalism.
RESULTS: These data show coordinated variation in the abundance of phosphorylated
ERK-MAPK components across the epidermis. Statistical analysis of these data
shows that associations between phosphorylated ERK-MAPK components which
correspond to canonical molecular interactions are dependent upon spatial
position within the epidermis. The model demonstrates that the spatial profile of
activation for ERK-MAPK signaling components across the epidermis may be
maintained in a cell-autonomous fashion by an underlying spatial gradient in
calcium signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate an extended phospho-protein profile of ERK-MAPK
signaling cascade components across the epidermis in situ, and statistical
associations in these data indicate canonical ERK-MAPK interactions underlie this
spatial profile of ERK-MAPK activation. Using mathematical modelling we have
demonstrated that spatially varying calcium signaling components across the
epidermis may be sufficient to maintain the spatial profile of ERK-MAPK signaling
cascade components in a cell-autonomous manner. These findings may have
significant implications for the wide range of cancer drugs which therapeutically
target ERK-MAPK signaling components.

PMCID: PMC4514964
PMID: 26209520  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cell Adh Migr. 2015 Jul 24:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Snail promotes cell migration through PI3K/AKT-dependent Rac1 activation as well 
as PI3K/AKT-independent pathways during prostate cancer progression.

Henderson V(1), Smith B, Burton LJ, Randle D, Morris M, Odero-Marah VA.

Author information: 
(1)a Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development; Department of
Biological Sciences ; Clark Atlanta University ; Atlanta , GA USA.

Snail, a zinc-finger transcription factor, induces epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which is associated with increased cell migration and
metastasis in cancer cells. Rac1 is a small G-protein which upon activation
results in formation of lamellipodia, the first protrusions formed by migrating
cells. We have previously shown that Snail promotes cell migration through
down-regulation of maspin tumor suppressor. We hypothesized that Snail's
regulation of cell migration may also involve Rac1 signaling regulated by
PI3K/AKT and/or MAPK pathways. We found that Snail overexpression in LNCaP and
22Rv1 prostate cancer cells increased Rac1 activity associated with increased
cell migration, and the Rac1 inhibitor, NSC23766, could inhibit Snail-mediated
cell migration. Conversely, Snail downregulation using shRNA in the aggressive
C4-2 prostate cancer cells decreased Rac1 activity and cell migration. Moreover, 
Snail overexpression increased ERK and PI3K/AKT activity in 22Rv1 prostate cancer
cells. Treatment of Snail-overexpressing 22Rv1 cells with LY294002, PI3K/AKT
inhibitor or U0126, MEK inhibitor, decreased cell migration significantly, but
only LY294002 significantly reduced Rac1 activity, suggesting that Snail promotes
Rac1 activation via the PI3K/AKT pathway. Furthermore, 22Rv1 cells overexpressing
Snail displayed decreased maspin levels, while inhibition of maspin expression in
22Rv1 cells with siRNA, led to increased PI3K/AKT, Rac1 activity and cell
migration, without affecting ERK activity, suggesting that maspin is upstream of 
PI3K/AKT. Overall, we have dissected signaling pathways by which Snail may
promote cell migration through MAPK signaling or alternatively through
PI3K/AKT-Rac1 signaling that involves Snail inhibition of maspin tumor
suppressor. This may contribute to prostate cancer progression.

PMID: 26207671  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul 23. pii: molcanther.0223.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Assessment of the in vivo activity of PI3K and MEK inhibitors in genetically
defined models of colorectal cancer.

Raja M(1), Zverev M(1), Seipel K(2), Williams GT(3), Clarke AR(4), Shaw PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute, Cardiff University. (2)Oncology,
University Hospital Bern. (3)School of Medicine, Cardiff University. (4)Cardiff
University, European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute ClarkeAR@cardiff.ac.uk.

The objective of tailoring medicines for cancer patients according to the
molecular profile of their disease holds great promise for the improvement of
cancer therapy. Nevertheless, this approach has been limited, in part due to the 
lack of predictive and informative pre-clinical studies. Herein, we describe an
assessment of the therapeutic potential of targeting PI3K/mTOR and MAPK
signalling in genetically defined mouse models of colorectal cancer (CRC)
mirroring disease subtypes targeted for novel therapy in the FOCUS4 trial. Our
studies demonstrate that dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition is highly effective in
invasive adenocarcinoma models characterised by combinatorial mutations in Apc
and Pten; Apc and Kras; and Apc, Pten and Kras. MEK inhibition was effective in
the combinatorial Apc and Kras setting, but had no impact in either Apc Pten
mutants or in Apc Pten Kras triple mutants. Furthermore, we describe the
importance of scheduling for combination studies and show that although no
additional benefit is gained in Apc Pten mice, combination of PI3K/mTOR and MAPK 
inhibition leads to an additive benefit in survival in Apc Kras mice and a
synergistic increase in survival in Apc Pten Kras mice. This is the first study
utilising robust CRC GEMMs to support the validity of PI3K/mTOR and MEK
inhibitors as tailored therapies for CRC and highlight the potential importance
of drug scheduling in the clinic.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26206338  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul 23. pii: molcanther.0429.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of wild-type p53-expressing AML by novel small molecule HDM2
inhibitor, CGM097.

Weisberg EL(1), Halilovic E(2), Cooke VG(2), Nonami A(3), Ren T(4), Sanda T(3),
Simkin I(5), Yuan J(2), Antonakos B(2), Barys L(6), Ito M(6), Stone RM(3),
Galinsky I(3), Cowens K(3), Nelson E(3), Sattler M(3), Jeay S(7), Wuerthner
JU(6), McDonough S(3), Wiesmann M(6), Griffin JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute
ellen_weisberg@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)Oncology, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical 
Research, Inc. (3)Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute. (4)National
Screening Laboratory for the Regional Centers of Excellence in Biodefense and
Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, Harvard Medical School. (5)Molecular
Genetics Core, Boston University School of Medicine. (6)Disease Area Oncology,
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc. (7)Oncology, Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research.

The tumor suppressor, p53, is a key regulator of apoptosis and functions upstream
in the apoptotic cascade by both indirectly and directly regulating Bcl-2 family 
proteins. In cells expressing wild-type (wt) p53, the HDM2 protein binds to p53
and blocks its activity. Inhibition of HDM2:p53 interaction activates p53 and
causes apoptosis or cell cycle arrest. Here, we investigated the ability of the
novel HDM2 inhibitor, CGM097, to potently and selectively kill wt p53-expressing 
AML cells. The anti-leukemic effects of CGM097 were studied using cell-based
proliferation assays (human AML cell lines, primary AML patient cells and normal 
bone marrow samples), apoptosis and cell cycle assays, ELISA, immunoblotting, and
an AML patient-derived in vivo mouse model. CGM097 potently and selectively
inhibited the proliferation of human AML cell lines and the majority of primary
AML cells expressing wt p53, but not mutant p53, in a target-specific manner.
Several patient samples that harbored mutant p53 were comparatively unresponsive 
to CGM097. Synergy was observed when CGM097 was combined with FLT3 inhibition
against oncogenic FLT3-expressing cells cultured both in the absence as well as
the presence of cytoprotective stromal-secreted cytokines, as well as when
combined with MEK inhibition in cells with activated MAPK signaling. Finally,
CGM097 was effective in reducing leukemia burden in vivo. These data suggest that
CGM097 is a promising treatment for AML characterized as harboring wt p53 as a
single agent, as well as in combination with other therapies targeting
oncogene-activated pathways that drive AML.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26206331  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015 Jul 24:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergy of molecular targeted approaches and immunotherapy in melanoma:
preclinical basis and clinical perspectives.

Sanlorenzo M(1), Vujic I, Moy A, Quaglino P, Fierro MT, Gammaitoni L,
Carnevale-Schianca F, Aglietta M, Sangiolo D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Dermatology , 
Via Cherasco 23, Torino , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Targeted therapy and immunotherapies are the novel pharmacologic
treatment strategies for metastatic melanoma. BRAF and MEK inhibitors effectively
block the hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway in BRAF mutant melanomas and also
have several other effects on melanoma cells and on the immune response. The aim 
of this work is to discuss the rationale, evidence and perspectives of approaches
combining target and immunotherapy against melanoma. Areas covered: We first
review the effects of BRAF and MEK inhibitors on melanoma cells and on the
different components of the immune system. Afterwards, we summarize the results
of the preclinical and clinical studies that have combined targeted therapy and
immunotherapy for the treatment of melanoma. Expert opinion: Clinical
applications of immunotherapy strategies have recently changed the therapeutic
mainstay for metastatic melanoma. Biologic and initial preclinical data support
their integration with innovative molecular targeted therapies, opening enormous 
perspectives for researchers in the effort of finding a definitive cure. Main
open challenges are the definition of reliable research models, assessment of
effective schedules, safety issues and designing of personalized approaches.

PMID: 26206099  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jul 23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29698. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of class I histone deacetylases by romidepsin potently induces
Epstein-Barr virus lytic cycle and mediates enhanced cell death with ganciclovir.

Hui KF(1), Cheung AK(2), Choi CK(1), Yeung PL(1), Middeldorp JM(3), Lung
ML(2,)(4), Tsao SW(5,)(4), Chiang AK(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Department of
Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Center for
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Research, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China. (5)Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, which inhibit eleven HDAC isoforms,
are widely used to induce EBV lytic cycle in EBV-associated cancers in vitro and 
in clinical trials. Here, we hypothesized that inhibition of one or several
specific HDAC isoforms by selective HDAC inhibitors could potently induce EBV
lytic cycle in EBV-associated malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)
and gastric carcinoma (GC). We found that inhibition of class I HDACs,
particularly HDAC-1, -2 and -3, was sufficient to induce EBV lytic cycle in NPC
and GC cells in vitro and in vivo. Among a panel of selective HDAC inhibitors,
the FDA-approved HDAC inhibitor romidepsin was found to be the most potent lytic 
inducer, which could activate EBV lytic cycle at â¼0.5 to 5 nM (versus â¼800 nM
achievable concentration in patients' plasma) in more than 75% of cells.
Up-regulation of p21(WAF1) , which is negatively regulated by class I HDACs was
observed prior to the induction of EBV lytic cycle. The up-regulation of
p21(WAF1) and induction of lytic cycle were abrogated by a specific inhibitor of 
PKC-Î´ but not the inhibitors of PI3K, MEK, p38 MAPK, JNK, or ATM pathways.
Interestingly, inhibition of HDAC-1, -2 and -3 by romidepsin or shRNA knockdown
could confer susceptibility of EBV-positive epithelial cells to the treatment
with ganciclovir. In conclusion, we demonstrated that inhibition of class I HDACs
by romidepsin could potently induce EBV lytic cycle and mediate enhanced cell
death with ganciclovir, suggesting potential application of romidepsin for the
treatment of EBV-associated cancers. This article is protected by copyright. All 
rights reserved.

Â© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 26205347  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 22. pii: clincanres.0393.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Cellular mechanisms underlying complete hematological response of chronic myeloid
leukemia to BRAF/MEK inhibition in a patient with concomitant metastatic
melanoma.

Andrews MC(1), Turner N(2), Boyd J(3), Roberts AW(4), Grigg A(5), Behren A(1),
Cebon JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunobiology Laboratory, Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute.
(2)Systems Biology and Personalized Medicine, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research. (3)Clinical Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Royal 
Melbourne Hospital. (4)Clinical Haematology and BMT service, The Royal Melbourne 
Hospital. (5)Haematology, Austin Health. (6)Cancer Immunobiology Laboratory,
Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute jonathan.cebon@onjcri.org.au.

PURPOSE: Targeted MEK inhibition is an emerging therapy in a number of solid
tumors. It holds particular promise in BRAF V600E mutation-positive malignant
melanoma, where constitutive activation and cell growth through the MAP kinase
(MAPK) pathway is well established. In vitro and pre-clinical research indicates 
that MAPK pathway activation is important in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
leukemogenesis however the potential of MEK inhibition has not yet been
investigated clinically in the setting of such hematological malignancies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We report a case of complete hematological response of CML
to MEK inhibition in a patient with synchronous metastatic melanoma, who received
treatment with combination BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitors. We studied the effects of 
these agents on proliferation and outgrowth of myeloid precursors, and
longitudinal shifts in peripheral blood phenotyping during the course of
treatment. A model cell line system was used to examine the effects of dabrafenib
and trametinib on MAPK and BCR-ABL1-signalling.
RESULTS: After 35 weeks on treatment with BRAF and MEK inhibitors, complete
hematologic response was observed without recourse to BCR-ABL1-targeted therapy. 
MEK inhibition was principally responsible for impaired proliferation of both
mature and primitive myeloid precursors, as well as growth and hemoglobinization 
of erythroid precursors. Paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway was seen in
response to BRAF inhibitor therapy but this was easily overcome by
clinically-relevant doses of concurrent MEK inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that further evaluation of the optimal MAPK
targeting approach is warranted to extend therapeutic options in CML.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26202951  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Exp Med. 2015 Jul 27;212(8):1323-36. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150110. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

T cell development involves TRAF3IP3-mediated ERK signaling in the Golgi.

Zou Q(1), Jin J(1), Xiao Y(1), Hu H(1), Zhou X(1), Jie Z(1), Xie X(1), Li JY(2), 
Cheng X(1), Sun SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030. (2)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030. (3)Department of
Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030 
The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030
ssun@mdanderson.org.

Generation of T lymphocytes in the thymus is guided by signal transduction from
the T cell receptor (TCR), but the underlying mechanism is incompletely
understood. Here we have identified a Golgi-associated factor, TRAF3-interacting 
protein 3 (TRAF3IP3), as a crucial mediator of thymocyte development. TRAF3IP3
deficiency in mice attenuates the generation of mature thymocytes caused by
impaired thymocyte-positive selection. TRAF3IP3 mediates TCR-stimulated
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and its upstream kinase mitogen/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (MEK). Interestingly, TRAF3IP3 exerts this signaling
function through recruiting MEK to the Golgi and, thereby, facilitating the
interaction of MEK with its activator BRAF. Transgenic expression of a
constitutively active MEK rescues the T cell development block in Traf3ip3
knockout mice. These findings establish TRAF3IP3 as a novel regulator of T cell
development and suggest a Golgi-specific ERK signaling mechanism that regulates
thymocyte development.

Â© 2015 Zou et al.

PMID: 26195727  [PubMed - in process]


10. Discov Med. 2015 Jun;19(107):455-61.

Novel mechanisms and therapeutic approaches in melanoma: targeting the MAPK
pathway.

Grimaldi AM(1), Simeone E, Festino L, Vanella V, Palla M, Ascierto PA.

Author information: 
(1)O.U. Melanoma, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, National Cancer 
Institute of Naples "G. Pascale" Foundation, Naples, Italy.

The development of novel treatments that selectively inhibit the RAS-RAF-MAPK
pathway represents a milestone in the history of melanoma treatment. BRAF
mutations occur in approximately 45% of cutaneous melanomas, while mutations in
NRAS occur in 15-25%. Vemurafenib was the first BRAF inhibitor to be approved in 
2011, based on the results of a phase III trial (BRIM-3) that showed higher
progression-free survival and overall survival compared with dacarbazine
chemotherapy in metastatic BRAF-mutated melanoma. Dabrafenib, another BRAF
inhibitor, has shown similar results and was approved in 2013. Preclinical
studies suggested that another novel group of agents, the MEK inhibitors, showed 
stronger inhibition of both mutated BRAF and NRAS cell cultures than vemurafenib.
Trametinib was the first MEK inhibitor approved in 2014, both as a single agent
and in combination with dabrafenib for the treatment of advanced BRAF-mutated
melanoma. Other MEK inhibitors are also in development. Concomitant inhibition of
both MEK and BRAF has shown more durable and greater tumor response than BRAF
monotherapy, by overcoming the multiple genetic mechanisms of escape. Combined
therapy prevents the development of acquired resistance as well as decreasing
cutaneous toxicity secondary to paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway
induced by BRAF inhibitors. Various combinations of BRAF and MEK inhibitors have 
shown promising results. Moreover, triple combination therapies involved other
agents with novel mechanisms of action are also being evaluated. These and other 
combination strategies involving immunotherapies and targeted therapies offer the
hope of improving outcomes beyond those already achieved with anti-BRAF
treatments.

PMID: 26175403  [PubMed - in process]


11. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jul;10(1):502-508. Epub 2015 May 4.

Type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase inhibits Rac1
activation in gastric cancer cells.

Wang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Wu M(1), Lan T(1), Wu Y(1), Li Y(1), Qian H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China.

Enhanced motility of cancer cells is a critical step in promoting tumor
metastasis, which remains the major cause of gastric cancer-associated mortality.
The small GTPase Rac1 is a key signaling component in the regulation of cell
migration. Previous studies have demonstrated that Rac1 activity may be regulated
by protein kinase G (PKG); however, the underlying mechanism is not yet clear.
The current study aimed to investigate the effect of type II cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKG II) on Rac1 activity. The
human gastric cancer cell line AGS was infected with adenoviral constructs
encoding PKG II to increase the expression of this enzyme, and treated with a
cGMP analog (8-pCPT-cGMP) to induce its activation. A Transwell assay was
employed to measure cell migration, and the activity of Rac1 was assessed using a
pull-down assay. Immunoprecipitation was used to isolate the Rac1 protein.
Phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate 3 kinase (PI3K) and its 
downstream effecter protein kinase B (Akt) are associated with lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA)-induced motility/migration of cancer cells. Extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK) is the major signaling molecule of the Mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK) mediated signaling pathway. ERK and its upstream activator 
MAPK kinase (MEK) are also involved in LPA-induced motility/migration of cancer
cells. Phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK and enriched Rac1 were detected by
western blotting. The results revealed that blocking the activation of Rac1 by
ectopically expressing an inactive Rac1 mutant (T17N) impeded LPA-induced cell
migration. Increased PKG II activity inhibited LPA-induced migration and
LPA-induced activation of Rac1; however, it had no effect on the phosphorylation 
of Rac1. PKG II also inhibited the activation of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated
signaling, which is important for LPA-induced Rac1 activation. These results
suggest that PKG II affects LPA-stimulated migration of AGS cells by blocking
Rac1 activation, via inhibition of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated signaling.

PMCID: PMC4487129
PMID: 26171059  [PubMed]


12. Cell Signal. 2015 Jul 11. pii: S0898-6568(15)00199-0. doi:
10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.06.007. [Epub ahead of print]

The mechanism and function of mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by
ARF1.

Zhou F(1), Dong C(1), Davis JE(2), Wu WH(2), Surrao K(2), Wu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido St, New Orleans, LA 70112, United
States. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, 1459 Laney Walker Blvd., Augusta, GA 30912, United
States. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido St, New Orleans, LA 70112, 
United States; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, 1459 Laney Walker Blvd., Augusta, GA 30912, 
United States. Electronic address: guwu@gru.edu.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) can be activated by a number of
biochemical pathways through distinct signaling molecules. We have recently
revealed a novel function for the Ras-like small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 1
(ARF1) in mediating the activation of Raf1-MEK-ERK1/2 pathway by G
protein-coupled receptors [Dong C, Li C and Wu G (2011) J Biol Chem 286,
43,361-43,369]. Here, we have further defined the underlying mechanism and the
possible function of ARF1-mediated MAPK pathway. We demonstrated that the
blockage of ARF1 activation and the disruption of ARF1 localization to the Golgi 
by mutating Thr48, a highly conserved residue involved in the exchange of GDP for
GTP, and the myristoylation site Gly2 abolished ARF1's ability to activate
ERK1/2. In addition, treatment with Golgi structure disrupting agents markedly
attenuated ARF1-mediated ERK1/2 activation. Furthermore, ARF1 significantly
promoted cell proliferation. More interestingly, ARF1 activated 90kDa ribosomal
S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) without influencing Elk-1 activation and ERK2 translocation to
the nuclei. These data demonstrate that, once activated, ARF1 activates the MAPK 
pathway likely using the Golgi as a main platform, which in turn activates the
cytoplasmic RSK1, leading to cell proliferation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26169956  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Radiother Oncol. 2015 Jul 8. pii: S0167-8140(15)00323-0. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2015.06.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Trametinib radiosensitises RAS- and BRAF-mutated melanoma by perturbing cell
cycle and inducing senescence.

Schick U(1), Kyula J(1), Barker H(1), Patel R(1), Zaidi S(1), Gregory C(1), Hafsi
H(1), Roulstone V(1), Deutsch E(2), McLaughlin M(1), Harrington K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (2)INSERM UMR 1030, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (3)Targeted
Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: Kevin.Harrington@icr.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Radiotherapy (RT) is used frequently in patients with melanoma, but
results are suboptimal because the disease is often radioresistant. This may be
due to constitutive activation of MAPK pathway signalling through mutations
involving RAS/RAF. Thus, we studied whether trametinib, a potent and selective
allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/2 could improve the efficacy of RT.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Clonogenic survival assays were performed in human
BRAF-mutant (A375), NRAS-mutant (D04, WM1631), KRAS-mutant (WM1791c) and
wild-type (PMWK) melanoma cell lines. The effects of trametinib with and without 
radiation on protein levels of MEK effectors were measured by immunoblot
analyses. Cell cycle effects, DNA damage repair, mitotic catastrophe and
senescence were measured using flow cytometry, Î³H2Ax staining, nuclear
fragmentation and Î²-galactosidase staining, respectively. Additionally, athymic
mice with D04 flank tumours were treated with fractionated RT after gavage with
trametinib and monitored for tumour growth.
RESULTS: All cell lines, except PMWK, exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity when RT was
combined with trametinib compared to either agent alone. Sensitiser enhancement
ratios were 1.70, 1.32, 1.10, and 1.70 for A375, D04, WM1361 and WM1791c,
respectively. Trametinib efficiently blocked RT-induced phosphorylation of ERK at
nanomolar concentrations. Increased radiosensitivity correlated with prolonged G1
arrest and reduction in the radioresistant S phase up to 48h following RT. A
larger population of senescence-activated Î²-galactosidase-positive cells was seen
in the trametinib pretreated group, and this correlated with activation of two of
the major mediators of induced senescence, p53 and pRb. Mice receiving the
combination treatment (trametinib 1mg/kg and RT over 3days) showed a reduced mean
tumour volume compared with mice receiving trametinib alone (p=0.016), or RT
alone (p=0.047). No overt signs of drug toxicity were observed.
CONCLUSION: Trametinib radiosensitised RAS-/RAF-mutated melanoma cells by
inducing prolonged G1 arrest and premature senescence. In this pre-clinical study
we demonstrate that combining trametinib and RT is well tolerated, and reduces
tumour growth in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26163092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):15814-27.

A MEK/PI3K/HDAC inhibitor combination therapy for KRAS mutant pancreatic cancer
cells.

Ischenko I(1), Petrenko O(1), Hayman MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly aggressive, metastatic
disease with limited treatment options. Factors contributing to the metastatic
predisposition and therapy resistance in pancreatic cancer are not well
understood. Here, we used a mouse model of KRAS-driven pancreatic carcinogenesis 
to define distinct subtypes of PDAC metastasis: epithelial, mesenchymal and
quasi-mesenchymal. We examined pro-survival signals in these cells and the
therapeutic response differences between them. Our data indicate that the
initiation and maintenance of the transformed state are separable, and that KRAS 
dependency is not a fundamental constant of KRAS-initiated tumors. Moreover, some
cancer cells can shuttle between the KRAS dependent (drug-sensitive) and
independent (drug-tolerant) states and thus escape extinction. We further
demonstrate that inhibition of KRAS signaling alone via co-targeting the MAPK and
PI3K pathways fails to induce extensive tumor cell death and, therefore, has
limited efficacy against PDAC. However, the addition of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors greatly improves outcomes, reduces the self-renewal of cancer
cells, and blocks cancer metastasis in vivo. Our results suggest that targeting
HDACs in combination with KRAS or its effector pathways provides an effective
strategy for the treatment of PDAC.

PMID: 26158412  [PubMed - in process]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3855-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510733112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

EGFR inhibition evokes innate drug resistance in lung cancer cells by preventing 
Akt activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function.

Phuchareon J(1), McCormick F(2), Eisele DW(1), Tetsu O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), CA 94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. (2)UCSF Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu. (3)Head and
Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), CA
94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu.

Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
About 14% of NSCLCs harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 
Despite remarkable progress in treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
only 5% of patients achieve tumor reduction >90%. The limited primary responses
are attributed partly to drug resistance inherent in the tumor cells before
therapy begins. Recent reports showed that activation of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) is an important determinant of this innate drug resistance. In
contrast, we demonstrate that EGFR inhibition promotes innate drug resistance
despite blockade of RTK activity in NSCLC cells. EGFR TKIs decrease both the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt protein kinase pathways for a
short time, after which the Ras/MAPK pathway becomes reactivated. Akt inhibition 
selectively blocks the transcriptional activation of Ets-1, which inhibits its
target gene, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a negative regulator
specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated. Furthermore, elevated
c-Src stimulates Ras GTP-loading and activates Raf and MEK kinases. These
observations suggest that not only ERK1/2 but also Akt activity is essential to
maintain Ets-1 in an active state. Therefore, despite high levels of ERK1/2,
Ets-1 target genes including DUSP6 and cyclins D1, D3, and E2 remain suppressed
by Akt inhibition. Reduction of DUSP6 in combination with elevated c-Src renews
activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway, which enhances cell survival by accelerating 
Bim protein turnover. Thus, EGFR TKIs evoke innate drug resistance by preventing 
Akt activity and inactivating Ets-1 function in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 26150526  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 2. pii: jbc.M114.634162. [Epub ahead of print]

Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors Sensitize a MAPK-Linked Toxicity Pathway on
Prolonged Exposure to Î²-Amyloid.

Arora K(1), Cheng J(1), Nichols RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hawaii, United States. (2)University of Hawaii, United States
robert.nichols@hawaii.edu.

Among putative downstream synaptic targets of Î²-amyloid (AÎ²) are signaling
molecules involved in synaptic function, memory formation and cognition, such as 
the MAP kinases, MKPs, CaMKII, CREB, Fyn and Tau. Here, we assessed the
activation and interaction of signaling pathways upon prolonged exposure to AÎ² in
model nerve cells expressing nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). Our goal
was to characterize the steps underlying sensitization of the nerve cells to
neurotoxicity when AÎ²-target receptors are present. Of particular focus was the
connection of the activated signaling molecules to oxidative stress.
Differentiated neuroblastoma cells expressing mouse Î±4Î²2-nAChRs were exposed to
AÎ²1-42 for intervals from 30 min to 3 days. The cells and cell-derived protein
extracts were then probed for activation of signaling pathway molecules (ERK,
JNK, CaMKII, CREB, MARCKS, Fyn, tau). Our results show substantial, progressive
activation of ERK in response to nanomolar AÎ² exposure, starting at the earliest 
time point. Increased ERK activation was followed by JNK activation as well as an
increased expression of PHF-tau, paralleled by increased levels of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). The impact of prolonged AÎ² on the levels of pERK, pJNK and 
ROS was attenuated by MEK-selective and JNK-selective inhibitors. In addition,
the MEK inhibitor as well as a JNK inhibitor attenuated AÎ²-induced nuclear
fragmentation, which followed the changes in ROS levels. These results
demonstrate that the presence of nAChRs sensitizes neurons to the neurotoxic
action of AÎ² through the timed activation of discrete intracellular signaling
molecules, suggesting pathways involved in the early stages of Alzheimers
disease.

Copyright Â© 2015, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26139609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Transl Med. 2015 Jul 3;13(1):210. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0581-2.

Vemurafenib resistance reprograms melanoma cells towards glutamine dependence.

Hernandez-Davies JE(1), Tran TQ(2), Reid MA(3), Rosales KR(4), Lowman XH(5), Pan 
M(6), Moriceau G(7,)(8), Yang Y(9), Wu J(10), Lo RS(11,)(12), Kong M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. jedavies@coh.org. (2)Department of Cancer 
Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA,
91010, USA. thatran@coh.org. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. mreida@coh.org. 
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. krosales@coh.org. (5)Department of Cancer 
Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA,
91010, USA. xlowman@coh.org. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. Minoan@coh.org. 
(7)Division of Dermatology/Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
gmoriceau@mednet.ucla.edu. (8)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
gmoriceau@mednet.ucla.edu. (9)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. yiyang@coh.org. 
(10)Animal Tumor Model Program, Division of Comparative Medicine, Beckman
Research Institute of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.
jwu@coh.org. (11)Division of Dermatology/Department of Medicine, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
rlo@mednet.ucla.edu. (12)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1662, USA.
rlo@mednet.ucla.edu. (13)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute
of City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. mekong@coh.org.

BACKGROUND: (V600) BRAF mutations drive approximately 50% of metastatic melanoma 
which can be therapeutically targeted by BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) and, based on
resistance mechanisms, the combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors (BRAFi + MEKi).
Although the combination therapy has been shown to provide superior clinical
benefits, acquired resistance is still prevalent and limits the overall survival 
benefits. Recent work has shown that oncogenic changes can lead to alterations in
tumor cell metabolism rendering cells addicted to nutrients, such as the amino
acid glutamine. Here, we evaluated whether melanoma cells with acquired
resistance display glutamine dependence and whether glutamine metabolism can be a
potential molecular target to treat resistant cells.
METHODS: Isogenic BRAFi sensitive parental (V600) BRAF mutant melanoma cell lines
and resistant (derived by chronic treatment with vemurafenib) sub-lines were used
to assess differences in the glutamine uptake and sensitivity to glutamine
deprivation. To evaluate a broader range of resistance mechanisms, isogenic pairs
where the sub-lines were resistant to BRAFi + MEKi were also studied. Since
resistant cells demonstrated increased sensitivity to glutamine deficiency, we
used glutaminase inhibitors BPTES [bis-2-(5 phenylacetamido-1, 2,
4-thiadiazol-2-yl) ethyl sulfide] and L-L-DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) to
treat MAPK pathway inhibitor (MAPKi) resistant cell populations both in vitro and
in vivo.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that MAPKi-acquired resistant cells uptook greater
amounts of glutamine and have increased sensitivity to glutamine deprivation than
their MAPKi-sensitive counterparts. In addition, it was found that both BPTES and
L-DON were more effective at decreasing cell survival of MAPKi-resistant
sub-lines than parental cell populations in vitro. We also showed that mutant
NRAS was critical for glutamine addiction in mutant NRAS driven resistance. When 
tested in vivo, we found that xenografts derived from resistant cells were more
sensitive to BPTES or L-DON treatment than those derived from parental cells.
CONCLUSION: Our study is a proof-of-concept for the potential of targeting
glutamine metabolism as an alternative strategy to suppress acquired
MAPKi-resistance in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4490757
PMID: 26139106  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17178-91.

Radiosensitization and downregulation of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
K (hnRNP K) upon inhibition of mitogen/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(MEK) in malignant melanoma cells.

Eder S(1), Lamkowski A(1), Priller M(1), Port M(1), Steinestel K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bundeswehr Institute of Radiobiology, 80937 Munich, Germany.
(2)Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149
Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP K) is an important
cofactor in the p53-mediated DNA damage response pathway upon ionizing radiation 
(IR) and exerts anti-apoptotic effects also independent of p53 pathway
activation. Furthermore, hnRNP K is overexpressed in various neoplasms including 
malignant melanoma (MM). Here, we investigate the role of hnRNP K in the
radioresistance of MM cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Our results show cytoplasmic expression of hnRNP K in human 
MM surgical specimens, but not in benign nevi, and a quick dose- and
time-dependent upregulation in response to IR accompanied by cytoplasmic
redistribution of the protein in the IPC-298 cellular tumor model carrying an
activating NRAS mutation (p.Q61L). SiRNA-based knockdown of hnRNP K induced a
delayed decline in Î³H2AX/53BP1-positive DNA repair foci upon IR. Pharmacological 
interference with MAPK signaling abrogated ERK phosphorylation, diminished
cellular hnRNP K levels, impaired Î³H2AX/53BP1-foci repair and proliferative
capability and increased apoptosis comparable to the observed hnRNP K knockdown
phenotype in IPC-298 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that pharmacological interference with MAPK
signaling increases vulnerability of NRAS-mutant malignant melanoma cells to
ionizing radiation along with downregulation of endogenous hnRNP K and point
towards a possible use for combined MEK inhibition and localized radiation
therapy of MM in the NRAS-mutant setting where BRAF inhibitors offer no clinical 
benefit.

PMID: 26136337  [PubMed - in process]


19. Immunology. 2015 Jul 1. doi: 10.1111/imm.12501. [Epub ahead of print]

H-ficolin binds Aspergillus fumigatus leading to activation of the lectin
complement pathway and modulation of lung epithelial immune responses.

Bidula S(1,)(2), Sexton DW(1,)(3), Yates M(1), Abdolrasouli A(4), Shah A(4),
Wallis R(5), Reed A(6), Armstrong-James D(4), Schelenz S(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia,
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK. (2)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of 
Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK. (3)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Science, Liverpool
John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK. (4)Section of
Infectious Diseases and Immunity, Imperial College London, Flowers Building,
Armstrong Road, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. (5)Departments of Infection, Immunity and
Inflammation and Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Henry Wellcome Building, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK. (6)Department of Lung Transplantation,
Harefield Hospital, Hill End Road, Middlesex, UB9 6JH, UK. (7)Department of
Microbiology, Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London, SW3 6NP, UK.

Aspergillus fumigatus is an opportunistic fungal pathogen that typically infects 
the lungs of immunocompromised patients leading to a high mortality. H-ficolin,
an innate immune opsonin, is produced by type II alveolar epithelial cells and
could participate in lung defences against infections. Here, we utilised the
human type II alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, to determine the involvement
of H-ficolin in fungal defence. Additionally, we investigated the presence of
H-ficolin in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) from transplant patients during
pneumonia. H-ficolin exhibited demonstrable binding to A. fumigatus conidia via
L-fucose, D-mannose and N-acetylglucosamine residues in a calcium- and
pH-dependent manner. Moreover, recognition led to lectin complement pathway
activation and enhanced fungal association with A549 cells. Following
recognition, H-ficolin opsonization manifested an increase in IL-8 production
from A549 cells which involved activation of the intracellular signalling
pathways MEK 1/2, p38 MAPK and JNK. Finally, H-ficolin concentrations were
significantly higher in BAL of patients with lung infections compared to control 
subjects (n=16; p=0.00726). ROC curve analysis further highlighted the potential 
of H-ficolin as a diagnostic marker for lung infection (AUC=0.77; p<0.0001).
Thus, H-ficolin participates in A. fumigatus defence via activation of the lectin
complement pathway, enhanced fungal-host interactions and modulated immune
responses. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26133042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5553-8. eCollection 2015.

The role of leptin in the ventricular remodeling process and its mechanism.

Zuo G(1), Du X(1), Zheng L(1), Wang C(1), Wang K(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Fifth Central Hospital No. 41 Zhejiang Road,
Tianjin 300450, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the role of leptin in the ventricular
remodeling process and its mechanism in the diabetic rats' model.
METHODS: The diabetic SD rats model induced by streptozotocin was established.
The SD rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: control group (20 rats treated
with citric acid/sodium citrate buffer); M0 group (10 rats treated with
physiological saline); M1 group (10 rats treated with 50 Î¼g/kg LP); M2 group (10 
rats treated with 100 Î¼g/kg LP). Ang-II was detected by ELISA. The expression
levels of LP and Ob-Rb were detected by RT-PCR. MAPK phosphorylation changes were
detected by western blotting. Myocardial morphology was observed.
RESULTS: Compared with control group, the blood glucose concentration and Ang-II 
significantly increased in diabetic model groups (P < 0.01) and body weight
decreased (P < 0.05). The expression levels of LP and Ob-Rb increased and heart
function decreased in diabetic model groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LP may be involved in the myocardial cell hypertrophy through the
neuroendocrine system and associated with the JAK-STAT, Ras-Raf-MEK-MAPK and
PI-3K signaling pathway, which provides a new concept for the pathogenesis of
cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC4483875
PMID: 26131137  [PubMed]

1. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Jul 25;9:41. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0187-6.

Regulation of ERK-MAPK signaling in human epidermis.

Cursons J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Gao J(6), Hurley DG(7,)(8,)(9,)(10,)(11,)(12),
Print CG(13,)(14,)(15), Dunbar PR(16,)(17), Jacobs MD(18), Crampin
EJ(19,)(20,)(21,)(22,)(23,)(24).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (2)NICTA Victoria
Research Lab, Melbourne, Australia. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (3)ARC Centre 
of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of 
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (4)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (5)Maurice
Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
joseph.cursons@unimelb.edu.au. (6)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
jerry.gao@unimelb.edu.au. (7)Systems Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (8)NICTA Victoria Research Lab, Melbourne,
Australia. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (9)Auckland Bioengineering Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au.
(10)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (11)Bioinformatics Institute, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (12)Faculty of
Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
daniel.hurley@unimelb.edu.au. (13)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (14)Bioinformatics Institute,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz.
(15)Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. c.print@auckland.ac.nz. (16)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (17)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
r.dunbar@auckland.ac.nz. (18)Department of Biology, New Zealand International
College, ACG New Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand. marc.jacobs@gmx.com. (19)Systems
Biology Laboratory, Melbourne School of Engineering, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (20)ARC Centre of Excellence
in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Melbourne School of Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.
(21)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (22)Maurice Wilkins Centre, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (23)School of
Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au. (24)School of Medicine, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. edmund.crampin@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The skin is largely comprised of keratinocytes within the
interfollicular epidermis. Over approximately two weeks these cells differentiate
and traverse the thickness of the skin. The stage of differentiation is therefore
reflected in the positions of cells within the tissue, providing a convenient
axis along which to study the signaling events that occur in situ during
keratinocyte terminal differentiation, over this extended two-week timescale. The
canonical ERK-MAPK signaling cascade (Raf-1, MEK-1/2 and ERK-1/2) has been
implicated in controlling diverse cellular behaviors, including proliferation and
differentiation. While the molecular interactions involved in signal transduction
through this cascade have been well characterized in cell culture experiments,
our understanding of how this sequence of events unfolds to determine cell fate
within a homeostatic tissue environment has not been fully characterized.
METHODS: We measured the abundance of total and phosphorylated ERK-MAPK signaling
proteins within interfollicular keratinocytes in transverse cross-sections of
human epidermis using immunofluorescence microscopy. To investigate these data we
developed a mathematical model of the signaling cascade using a normalized-Hill
differential equation formalism.
RESULTS: These data show coordinated variation in the abundance of phosphorylated
ERK-MAPK components across the epidermis. Statistical analysis of these data
shows that associations between phosphorylated ERK-MAPK components which
correspond to canonical molecular interactions are dependent upon spatial
position within the epidermis. The model demonstrates that the spatial profile of
activation for ERK-MAPK signaling components across the epidermis may be
maintained in a cell-autonomous fashion by an underlying spatial gradient in
calcium signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate an extended phospho-protein profile of ERK-MAPK
signaling cascade components across the epidermis in situ, and statistical
associations in these data indicate canonical ERK-MAPK interactions underlie this
spatial profile of ERK-MAPK activation. Using mathematical modelling we have
demonstrated that spatially varying calcium signaling components across the
epidermis may be sufficient to maintain the spatial profile of ERK-MAPK signaling
cascade components in a cell-autonomous manner. These findings may have
significant implications for the wide range of cancer drugs which therapeutically
target ERK-MAPK signaling components.

PMCID: PMC4514964
PMID: 26209520  [PubMed - in process]


2. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Jul 21. pii: S1043-6618(15)00143-7. doi:
10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.010. [Epub ahead of print]

A historical overview of protein kinases and their targeted small molecule
inhibitors.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742-8814, United States. Electronic address: rrj@brimr.org.

Protein kinases play a predominant regulatory role in nearly every aspect of cell
biology and they can modify the function of a protein in almost every conceivable
way. Protein phosphorylation can increase or decrease enzyme activity and it can 
alter other biological activities such as transcription and translation.
Moreover, some phosphorylation sites on a given protein are stimulatory while
others are inhibitory. The human protein kinase gene family consists of 518
members along with 106 pseudogenes. Furthermore, about 50 of the 518 gene
products lack important catalytic residues and are called protein pseudokinases. 
The non-catalytic allosteric interaction of protein kinases and pseudokinases
with other proteins has added an important regulatory feature to the biochemistry
and cell biology of the protein kinase superfamily. With rare exceptions, a
divalent cation such as Mg(2+) is required for the reaction. All protein kinases 
exist in a basal state and are activated only as necessary by divergent
regulatory stimuli. The mechanisms for switching between dormant and active
protein kinases can be intricate. Phosphorylase kinase was the first protein
kinase to be characterized biochemically and the mechanism of its regulation led 
to the discovery of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A, or PKA),
which catalyzes the phosphorylation and activation of phosphorylase kinase. This 
was the first protein kinase cascade or signaling module to be elucidated. The
epidermal growth factor receptor-Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling module contains
protein-tyrosine, protein-serine/threonine, and dual specificity protein kinases.
PKA has served as a prototype of this enzyme family and more is known about this 
enzyme than any other protein kinase. The inactive PKA holoenzyme consists of two
regulatory and two catalytic subunits. After binding four molecules of cAMP, the 
holoenzyme dissociates into a regulatory subunit dimer (each monomer binds two
cAMP) and two free and active catalytic subunits. PKA and all other protein
kinase domains have a small amino-terminal lobe and large carboxyterminal lobe as
determined by X-ray crystallography. The N-lobe and C-lobe form a cleft that
serves as a docking site for MgATP. Nearly all active protein kinases contain a
K/E/D/D signature sequence that plays important structural and catalytic roles.
Protein kinases contain hydrophobic catalytic and regulatory spines and
collateral shell residues that are required to assemble the active enzyme. There 
are two general kinds of conformational changes associated with most protein
kinases. The first conformational change involves the formation of an intact
regulatory spine to form an active enzyme. The second conformational change
occurs in active kinases as they toggle between open and closed conformations
during their catalytic cycles. Because mutations and dysregulation of protein
kinases play causal roles in human disease, this family of enzymes has become one
of the most important drug targets over the past two decades. Imatinib was
approved by the United States FDA for the treatment of chronic myelogenous
leukemia in 2001; this small molecule inhibits the BCR-Abl protein kinase
oncoprotein that results from the formation of the Philadelphia chromosome. More 
than two dozen other orally effective mechanism-based small molecule protein
kinase inhibitors have been subsequently approved by the FDA. These drugs bind to
the ATP-binding site of their target enzymes and extend into nearby hydrophobic
pockets. Most of these protein kinase inhibitors prolong survival in cancer
patients only weeks or months longer than standard cytotoxic therapies. In
contrast, the clinical effectiveness of imatinib against chronic myelogenous
leukemia is vastly superior to that of any other targeted protein kinase
inhibitor with overall survival lasting a decade or more. However, the near
universal and expected development of drug resistance in the treatment of
neoplastic disorders requires new approaches to solve this therapeutic challenge.
Cancer is the predominant indication for these drugs, but disease targets are
increasing. For example, we can expect the approval of new drugs inhibiting other
protein kinases in the treatment of illnesses such as hypertension, Parkinson's
disease, and autoimmune diseases.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26207888  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 20;5:12366. doi: 10.1038/srep12366.

TMPRSS4 facilitates epithelial-mesenchymal transition of hepatocellular carcinoma
and is a predictive marker for poor prognosis of patients after curative
resection.

Wang CH(1), Guo ZY(2), Chen ZT(2), Zhi XT(2), Li DK(2), Dong ZR(3), Chen ZQ(2),
Hu SY(2), Li T(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of general surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan
250012, P.R.China [2] Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Key Laboratory for Carcinogenesis &Cancer Invasion, the Chinese
Ministry of Education, Shanghai 200032, P.R.China. (2)Department of general
surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, P.R.China. (3)Liver
Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory for
Carcinogenesis &Cancer Invasion, the Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai
200032, P.R.China.

TMPRSS4 (Transmembrane protease serine 4) is up-regulated in a broad spectrum of 
cancers. However, little is known about the biological effects of TMPRSS4 on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the related mechanisms. In the present study, 
we found that overexpression of TMPRSS4 significantly promoted the invasion,
migration, adhesion and metastasis of HCC. Further more, TMPRSS4 induced EMT of
HCC, which was mediated via snail and slug as a result of Raf/MEK/ERK1/2
activation, and inhibition of ERK1/2 activation by its inhibitor was associated
with reduced cell invasion and reversion of EMT. In addition, we demonstrated
that TMPRSS4 remarkably suppressed the expression of RECK, an inhibitor of
angiogenesis, and drastically induced tumor angiogenesis and growth. More
important, in clinical HCC specimens, TMPRSS4 expression was significantly
correlated with tumor staging and was inversely correlated with E-cadherin and
RECKS expression. Expression of TMPRSS4 is significantly associated with HCC
progression and is an independent prognostic factor for postoperative worse
survival and recurrence. In conclusion, TMPRSS4 functions as a positive regulator
of Raf/MEK/ERK1/2 pathway and promotes HCC progression by inducing EMT and
angiogenesis. The increase of TMPRSS4 expression may be a key event for HCC
progression and may be regarded as a potential prognostic marker for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4507176
PMID: 26190376  [PubMed - in process]


4. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Jul 17;5:e324. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.52.

Peripheral blood cells from children with RASopathies show enhanced spontaneous
colonies growth in vitro and hyperactive RAS signaling.

Gaipa G(1), Bugarin C(1), Cianci P(2), Sarno J(1), Bonaccorso P(3), Biondi A(4), 
Selicorni A(2).

Author information: 
(1)M. Tettamanti Research Centre, Pediatric Clinic, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Monza, Italy. (2)Pediatrics Clinical Genetics, MBBM-AO San Gerardo Foundation,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. (3)1] M. Tettamanti Research Centre, 
Pediatric Clinic, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy [2] Center of
Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Azienda Policlinico-OVE, University of Catania,
Catania, Italy. (4)1] M. Tettamanti Research Centre, Pediatric Clinic, University
of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy [2] Pediatrics Clinical Genetics, MBBM-AO San
Gerardo Foundation, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.

Germline mutations in genes coding for molecules involved in the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK 
pathway are the hallmarks of a newly classified family of autosomal dominant
syndromes termed RASopathies. Myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), in particular,
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, can lead to potentially severe complications in
children with Noonan syndrome (NS). We studied 27 children with NS or other
RASopathies and 35 age-matched children as control subjects. Peripheral blood
(PB) cells from these patients were studied for in vitro colony-forming units
(CFUs) activity, as well as for intracellular phosphosignaling. Higher
spontaneous growth of both burst-forming units-erythroid (BFU-E) and
CFU-granulocyte/macrophage (CFU-GM) colonies from RAS-mutated patients were
observed as compared with control subjects. We also observed a significantly
higher amount of GM-colony-stimulating factor-induced p-ERK in children with
RASopathies. Our findings demonstrate for the first time that PB cells isolated
from children suffering from NS or other RASopathies without MPD display enhanced
BFU-E and CFU-GM colony formation in vitro. The biological significance of these 
findings clearly awaits further studies. Collectively, our data provide a basis
for further investigating of only partially characterized hematological
alterations present in children suffering from RASopathies, and may provide new
markers for progression toward malignant MPD in these patients.

PMID: 26186557  [PubMed - in process]


5. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jul 14. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12395. [Epub ahead of
print]

A (heat) shocking development: FBXW7 loss unleashes HSF1 to drive melanoma
invasion and metastasis.

Cho E, Grim JE.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer because of its strong tendency for 
local invasion, distant metastasis, and resistance to traditional cytotoxic
chemotherapy. A more complete understanding of the genetic landscape of melanoma 
will define and clarify the molecular pathways that drive tumor growth and will
also reveal new therapeutic targets. Indeed, this is already being borne out:
multiple studies have demonstrated that activating mutations in components of the
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway occur in over half of melanoma tumor samples and targeted
inhibitors of this pathway are currently used to treat patients with these
cancers. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26178611  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Discov Med. 2015 Jun;19(107):455-61.

Novel mechanisms and therapeutic approaches in melanoma: targeting the MAPK
pathway.

Grimaldi AM(1), Simeone E, Festino L, Vanella V, Palla M, Ascierto PA.

Author information: 
(1)O.U. Melanoma, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, National Cancer 
Institute of Naples "G. Pascale" Foundation, Naples, Italy.

The development of novel treatments that selectively inhibit the RAS-RAF-MAPK
pathway represents a milestone in the history of melanoma treatment. BRAF
mutations occur in approximately 45% of cutaneous melanomas, while mutations in
NRAS occur in 15-25%. Vemurafenib was the first BRAF inhibitor to be approved in 
2011, based on the results of a phase III trial (BRIM-3) that showed higher
progression-free survival and overall survival compared with dacarbazine
chemotherapy in metastatic BRAF-mutated melanoma. Dabrafenib, another BRAF
inhibitor, has shown similar results and was approved in 2013. Preclinical
studies suggested that another novel group of agents, the MEK inhibitors, showed 
stronger inhibition of both mutated BRAF and NRAS cell cultures than vemurafenib.
Trametinib was the first MEK inhibitor approved in 2014, both as a single agent
and in combination with dabrafenib for the treatment of advanced BRAF-mutated
melanoma. Other MEK inhibitors are also in development. Concomitant inhibition of
both MEK and BRAF has shown more durable and greater tumor response than BRAF
monotherapy, by overcoming the multiple genetic mechanisms of escape. Combined
therapy prevents the development of acquired resistance as well as decreasing
cutaneous toxicity secondary to paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway
induced by BRAF inhibitors. Various combinations of BRAF and MEK inhibitors have 
shown promising results. Moreover, triple combination therapies involved other
agents with novel mechanisms of action are also being evaluated. These and other 
combination strategies involving immunotherapies and targeted therapies offer the
hope of improving outcomes beyond those already achieved with anti-BRAF
treatments.

PMID: 26175403  [PubMed - in process]


7. Leukemia. 2015 Jul 13. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.180. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovery of a BTK/MNK dual inhibitor for lymphoma and leukemia.

Wu H(1), Hu C(2), Wang A(1), Weisberg EL(3), Chen Y(2), Yun CH(4), Wang W(2), Liu
Y(3), Liu X(1), Tian B(5), Wang J(4), Zhao Z(2), Liang Y(4), Li B(2), Wang L(2), 
Wang B(2), Chen C(2), Buhrlage SJ(4), Qi Z(2), Zou F(2), Nonami A(3), Li Y(3),
Fernandes SM(3), Adamia S(3), Stone RM(3), Galinsky IA(3), Wang X(6), Yang G(3), 
Griffin JD(3), Brown JR(3), Eck MJ(4), Liu J(2), Gray NS(4), Liu Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] High Magnetic Field laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, 
P. R. China [2] University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, Hefei, P.
R. China. (2)High Magnetic Field laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 
Anhui, P. R. China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Biological
Chemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University; Beijing Ophthalmology & Visual Science Key Laboratory, Beijing, P. R.
China. (6)Department of Lymphoma, Sino-US Center for Lymphoma and Leukemia,
Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical
Research Center of Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy,
Tianjin, China. (7)1] High Magnetic Field laboratory, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, P. R. China [2] University of Science and Technology of
China, Anhui, Hefei, P. R. China [3] Hefei Science Center, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, P. R. China.

BTK kinase is a member of the TEC kinase family and is a key regulator of the
B-cell Receptor (BCR)-mediated signaling pathway. It is important for B-cell
maturation, proliferation, survival and metastasis. Pharmacological inhibition of
BTK is clinically effective against a variety of B-cell malignances, such as MCL,
CLL, AML and ABC-DLBCL. MNK kinase is one of the key downstream regulators in the
RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway and controls protein synthesis via regulating the
activity of eIF4E. Inhibition of MNK activity has been observed to moderately
inhibit the proliferation of AML cells. Through a structure-based drug design
approach, we have discovered a selective and potent BTK/MNK dual kinase inhibitor
(QL-X-138), which exhibits covalent binding to BTK and non-covalent binding to
MNK. Compared to the BTK kinase inhibitor (PCI-32765) and the MNK kinase
inhibitor (cercosporamide), QL-X-138 enhanced the anti-proliferative efficacies
in vitro against a variety of B-cell cancer cell lines, as well as AML and CLL
primary patient cells which respond moderately to BTK inhibitor in vitro. The
agent can effectively arrest the growth of lymphoma and leukemia cells at the
G0-G1 stage and can induce strong apoptotic cell death. These primary results
demonstrate that simultaneous inhibition of BTK and MNK kinase activity might be 
a new therapeutic strategy for B-cell malignances.Leukemia accepted article
preview online, 13 July 2015. doi:10.1038/leu.2015.180.

PMID: 26165234  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cell Signal. 2015 Jul 9;27(10):1939-1948. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.07.003.
[Epub ahead of print]

ERK1/2 can feedback-regulate cellular MEK1/2 levels.

Hong SK(1), Wu PK(1), Karkhanis M(1), Park JI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226,
USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI
53226, USA. Electronic address: jipark@mcw.edu.

Signal transduction of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway is regulated by various feedback
mechanisms. Given the greater molar ratio between Raf-MEK than between MEK-ERK in
cells, it may be possible that MEK1/2 levels are regulated to modulate
Raf/MEK/ERK activity upon pathway stimulation. Nevertheless, it has not been
reported whether MEK1/2 expression can be subject to a feedback regulation. Here,
we report that the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway can feedback-regulate cellular MEK1 and
MEK2 levels. In different cell types, ÎRaf-1:ER- or B-Raf(V600E)-mediated MEK/ERK
activation increased MEK1 but decreased MEK2 levels. These regulations were
abrogated by ERK1/2 knockdown mediated by RNA interference, suggesting the
presence of a feedback mechanism that regulates MEK1/2 levels. Subsequently,
analyses using qPCR and luciferase reporters of the DNA promoter and 3'
untranslated region revealed that the feedback MEK1 upregulation was in part
attributed to increased transcription. However, the feedback MEK2 downregulation 
was only observed at protein levels, which was blocked by the proteasome
inhibitors, MG132 and bortezomib, suggesting that the MEK2 regulation is mediated
at a post-translational level. These results suggest that the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway
can feedback-regulate cellular levels of MEK1 and MEK2, wherein MEK1 levels are
upregulated at transcriptional level whereas MEK2 levels are downregulated at
posttranslational level.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26163823  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Radiother Oncol. 2015 Jul 8. pii: S0167-8140(15)00323-0. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2015.06.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Trametinib radiosensitises RAS- and BRAF-mutated melanoma by perturbing cell
cycle and inducing senescence.

Schick U(1), Kyula J(1), Barker H(1), Patel R(1), Zaidi S(1), Gregory C(1), Hafsi
H(1), Roulstone V(1), Deutsch E(2), McLaughlin M(1), Harrington K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (2)INSERM UMR 1030, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (3)Targeted
Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: Kevin.Harrington@icr.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Radiotherapy (RT) is used frequently in patients with melanoma, but
results are suboptimal because the disease is often radioresistant. This may be
due to constitutive activation of MAPK pathway signalling through mutations
involving RAS/RAF. Thus, we studied whether trametinib, a potent and selective
allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/2 could improve the efficacy of RT.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Clonogenic survival assays were performed in human
BRAF-mutant (A375), NRAS-mutant (D04, WM1631), KRAS-mutant (WM1791c) and
wild-type (PMWK) melanoma cell lines. The effects of trametinib with and without 
radiation on protein levels of MEK effectors were measured by immunoblot
analyses. Cell cycle effects, DNA damage repair, mitotic catastrophe and
senescence were measured using flow cytometry, Î³H2Ax staining, nuclear
fragmentation and Î²-galactosidase staining, respectively. Additionally, athymic
mice with D04 flank tumours were treated with fractionated RT after gavage with
trametinib and monitored for tumour growth.
RESULTS: All cell lines, except PMWK, exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity when RT was
combined with trametinib compared to either agent alone. Sensitiser enhancement
ratios were 1.70, 1.32, 1.10, and 1.70 for A375, D04, WM1361 and WM1791c,
respectively. Trametinib efficiently blocked RT-induced phosphorylation of ERK at
nanomolar concentrations. Increased radiosensitivity correlated with prolonged G1
arrest and reduction in the radioresistant S phase up to 48h following RT. A
larger population of senescence-activated Î²-galactosidase-positive cells was seen
in the trametinib pretreated group, and this correlated with activation of two of
the major mediators of induced senescence, p53 and pRb. Mice receiving the
combination treatment (trametinib 1mg/kg and RT over 3days) showed a reduced mean
tumour volume compared with mice receiving trametinib alone (p=0.016), or RT
alone (p=0.047). No overt signs of drug toxicity were observed.
CONCLUSION: Trametinib radiosensitised RAS-/RAF-mutated melanoma cells by
inducing prolonged G1 arrest and premature senescence. In this pre-clinical study
we demonstrate that combining trametinib and RT is well tolerated, and reduces
tumour growth in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26163092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Biomed Sci. 2015 Jul 9;22(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0158-7.

The effects and mechanisms of SLC34A2 in tumorigenesis and progression of human
non-small cell lung cancer.

Wang Y(1), Yang W(2), Pu Q(3), Yang Y(4), Ye S(5), Ma Q(6), Ren J(7), Cao Z(8),
Zhong G(9), Zhang X(10), Liu L(11), Zhu W(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. wangyu_4932@163.com. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. younger1030@163.com. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37 Guo Xue Xiang, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. 
R. China. puqiang11@gmail.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. scu_yanyang@163.com.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. shiny9191@163.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. qingpingle2008@163.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. rjham@126.com. (8)State 
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th
Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu,
Sichuan, P. R. China. caozhixing007@163.com. (9)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. guoxingzhong@gmail.com. (10)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer 
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. 42539791@qq.com.
(11)Department of Thoracic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 
37 Guo Xue Xiang, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. lunxu_liu@aliyun.com.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. zhuwen@scu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: SLC34A2 with highest expressions in lung, small intestine and kidney 
encoded a type 2b sodium-dependent phosphate transporter (NaPi-IIb). In lung,
SLC34A2 only expressed in the apical membrane of type II alveolar epithelium
cells (ATII cells) and played a pivotal role during the fetal lung development
and embryonic development. ATII cells acting as multifunctional stem cells might 
transform into NSCLC after undergoing exogenous or endogenous factors. Increasing
evidences showed that the genes performing critical roles during embryogenesis
were also expressed during the development of cancer. In addition, recent
research found the expression of SLC34A2 had a significant difference between the
surgical samples of NSCLC and normal tissues, and SLC34A2 was down-regulated in
lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549 and up-regulation expression of SLC34A2 could 
significantly inhibit cell viability and invasion of A549 in vitro. These results
suggested SLC34A2 might play an important role in the development of NSCLC.
However, the role of SLC34A2 in tumorigenesis and progression of NSCLC remains
unknown.
RESULTS: Our study found that SLC34A2 was also significantly down-regulated in
14/15 of examined NSCLC tissues. Moreover, we found that expressions of SLC34A2
were reduced in six NSCLC cell lines for the first time. Our result also revealed
a dramatic inhibitory effects of SLC34A2 on cell growth, migration and invasion
of several NSCLC cell lines. SLC34A2 also strongly inhibited tumor growth and
metastasis ability in A549 subcutaneous tumor model and lung metastasis model,
respectively. Further studies found that the suppressive effects of SLC34A2 on
tumorigenesis and progression might be associated with the down-regulation of
related protein in PI3K/Akt and Ras/Raf/MEK signal pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, our data indicated that SLC34A2 could exert
significantly suppressive effects on tumorigenesis and progression of NSCLC.
SLC34A2 might provide new insights for further understanding the early
pathogenesis of human NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4497375
PMID: 26156586  [PubMed - in process]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3855-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510733112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

EGFR inhibition evokes innate drug resistance in lung cancer cells by preventing 
Akt activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function.

Phuchareon J(1), McCormick F(2), Eisele DW(1), Tetsu O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), CA 94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. (2)UCSF Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu. (3)Head and
Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), CA
94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu.

Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
About 14% of NSCLCs harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 
Despite remarkable progress in treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
only 5% of patients achieve tumor reduction >90%. The limited primary responses
are attributed partly to drug resistance inherent in the tumor cells before
therapy begins. Recent reports showed that activation of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) is an important determinant of this innate drug resistance. In
contrast, we demonstrate that EGFR inhibition promotes innate drug resistance
despite blockade of RTK activity in NSCLC cells. EGFR TKIs decrease both the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt protein kinase pathways for a
short time, after which the Ras/MAPK pathway becomes reactivated. Akt inhibition 
selectively blocks the transcriptional activation of Ets-1, which inhibits its
target gene, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a negative regulator
specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated. Furthermore, elevated
c-Src stimulates Ras GTP-loading and activates Raf and MEK kinases. These
observations suggest that not only ERK1/2 but also Akt activity is essential to
maintain Ets-1 in an active state. Therefore, despite high levels of ERK1/2,
Ets-1 target genes including DUSP6 and cyclins D1, D3, and E2 remain suppressed
by Akt inhibition. Reduction of DUSP6 in combination with elevated c-Src renews
activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway, which enhances cell survival by accelerating 
Bim protein turnover. Thus, EGFR TKIs evoke innate drug resistance by preventing 
Akt activity and inactivating Ets-1 function in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 26150526  [PubMed - in process]


12. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 4;15:497. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1515-3.

Variations of BRAF mutant allele percentage in melanomas.

HÃ©lias-Rodzewicz Z(1,)(2), Funck-Brentano E(3,)(4), Baudoux L(5), Jung CK(6),
Zimmermann U(7,)(8), Marin C(9,)(10), Clerici T(11,)(12), Le Gall C(13,)(14),
Peschaud F(15,)(16), Taly V(17), Saiag P(18,)(19), Emile JF(20,)(21).

Author information: 
(1)EA4340, Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
zofia.helias@aphp.fr. (2)Department of Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital, APHP,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. zofia.helias@aphp.fr. (3)EA4340, Versailles
University, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. elisa.funck-brentano@aphp.fr.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt,
France. elisa.funck-brentano@aphp.fr. (5)EA4340, Versailles University,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. laure.baudoux@yahoo.fr. (6)Department of Hospital
Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
ckjung@catholic.ac.kr. (7)EA4340, Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt,
France. us.zimmermann@gmail.fr. (8)Department of Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ©
Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. us.zimmermann@gmail.fr. (9)EA4340, 
Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. cristi.marin@aphp.fr.
(10)Department of Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, 
France. cristi.marin@aphp.fr. (11)EA4340, Versailles University,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. thierryclerici@noos.fr. (12)Department of
Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
thierryclerici@noos.fr. (13)EA4340, Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt, 
France. legall.catherine@voila.fr. (14)Department of Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ©
Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. legall.catherine@voila.fr.
(15)EA4340, Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
frederique.peschaud@aphp.fr. (16)Department of Surgery, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital,
APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. frederique.peschaud@aphp.fr. (17)INSERM
UMR-S1147, University Paris Sorbonne Cite, Paris, France.
valerie.taly@parisdescartes.fr. (18)EA4340, Versailles University,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. philippe.saiag@uvsq.fr. (19)Department of
Dermatology, Ambroise ParÃ© Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
philippe.saiag@uvsq.fr. (20)EA4340, Versailles University, Boulogne-Billancourt, 
France. jean-francois.emile@uvsq.fr. (21)Department of Pathology, Ambroise ParÃ©
Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France. jean-francois.emile@uvsq.fr.

BACKGROUND: BRAF mutations are present in 40 % of human skin melanomas. Mutated
tumors with an increased percentage of BRAF mutant alleles (BRAF-M%) may have a
better response to RAF/MEK inhibitors. We evaluated the BRAF-M% in melanomas, and
the genetic causes of its variation.
METHODS: BRAF-M% was quantified by pyrosequencing, real-time PCR (rtPCR) and/or
picoliter-droplet PCR (dPCR). BRAF mutant expression was detected by
immunohistochemistry. Chromosomal alterations were analyzed with fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH), and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays.
RESULTS: BRAF-M% quantification obtained with pyrosequencing was highly
correlated (Râ=â0.94) with rtPCR, and with dPCR. BRAF-M% quantified from DNA and 
RNA were also highly correlated (Râ=â0.98). Among 368 samples with >80 % tumor
cells, 38.6 % had a BRAF (V600E) mutation. Only 66.2 % cases were heterozygous
(BRAF-M% 30 to 60 %). Increased BRAF-M% (>60 %) was observed in 19 % of cases.
FISH showed a polysomy of chromosome 7 in 13.6 %, 35.3 % and 54.5 % of BRAF
wild-type, heterozygous and non-heterozygous BRAF-mutated samples, respectively
(Pâ<â0.005). Amplification (5.6 %) and loss (3.2 %) of BRAF locus were rare. By
contrast, chromosome 7 was disomic in 27/27 BRAF-mutated nevi.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF-M% is heterogeneous and frequently increased in BRAF-mutant
melanomas. Aneuploidy of chromosome 7 is more frequent in BRAF mutant melanomas, 
specifically in those with high BRAF-M%.

PMCID: PMC4491198
PMID: 26141748  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(3):1223-36. doi: 10.1159/000430292. Epub 2015 Jun
30.

Caveolin-1 Confers Resistance of Hepatoma Cells to Anoikis by Activating IGF-1
Pathway.

Tang W(1), Feng X, Zhang S, Ren Z, Liu Y, Yang B, Lv B, Cai Y, Xia J, Ge N.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Anoikis resistance is a prerequisite for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) metastasis. The role of Caveolin-1 (CAV1) in anoikis resistance
of HCC remains unclear.
METHODS: The oncogenic effect of CAV1 on anchor-independent growth and anoikis
resistance was investigated by overexpression and knockdown of CAV1 in hepatoma
cells. IGF-1 pathway and its downstream signals were detected by immunoblot
analysis. Caveolae invagination and IGF-1R internalization was studied by
electron microscopy and (125)I-IGF1 internalization assay, respectively. The role
of IGF-1R and tyrosine-14 residue (Y-14) of CAV1 was explored by deletion
experiment and mutation experiment, respectively. The correlation of CAV1 and
IGF-1R was further examined by immunochemical analysis in 120 HCC specimens.
RESULTS: CAV1 could promote anchor-independent growth and anoikis resistance in
hepatoma cells. CAV1-overexpression increased the expression of IGF-1R and
subsequently activated PI3K/Akt and RAF/MEK/ERK pathway, while CAV1 knockdown
showed the opposite effect. The mechanism study revealed that CAV1 facilitated
caveolae invagination and (125)I-IGF1 internalization. IGF-1R deletion or Y-14
mutation reversed CAV1 mediated anchor-independent growth and anoikis resistance.
In addition, CAV1 expression was positively related to IGF-1R expression in human
HCC tissues.
CONCLUSION: CAV1 confers resistance of hepatoma cells to anoikis by activating
IGF-1 pathway, providing a potential therapeutic target for HCC metastasis. Â©
2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26138883  [PubMed - in process]


14. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul 2. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3071. [Epub ahead of print]

Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 are the major determinants of the apoptotic response to dual
PI3K and MEK blockage.

Jokinen E(1), Koivunen JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiotherapy and Medical Research Center
Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, PB22 90029 OYS,
Finland.

The dual targeting of PI3K-AKT-mTOR and Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathways is a potential
anticancer therapy, but unfortunately, the response rate has been low in early
phase clinical trials. Pre-clinical models have suggested that an apoptotic
response to dual PI3K and MEK targeting is relatively rare and understanding
apoptotic avoidance could lead to increased clinical efficiency. This study
investigated solid cancer cell lines, which are known to be sensitive to dual
PI3K and MEK inhibition but to have a limited apoptotic response. The cells were 
exposed to dual PI3K and MEK blockage in combination with a panel of additional
pharmacological agents and cytotoxicity and apoptosis were analyzed. Our results 
indicated that the BH3 mimetic ABT-263, the HDAC inhibitor entinostat and the
multikinase inhibitor dasatinib increased the cytotoxicity and apoptotic response
of dual PI3K and MEK targeting. Furthermore, ABT-263 and entinostat was able to
induce apoptosis in combination with single agent PI3K and MEK inhibitors.
Protein expression, immunoprecipitation and siRNA knockdown models suggested that
Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 were the most important factors circumventing PI3K and/or MEK
inhibition-mediated apoptosis. The results suggest that the cytotoxicity of PI3K 
and/or MEK inhibitor treatments can be augmented by combinatory approaches
targeting anti-apoptotic mediators Bcl-xl and Mcl-1.

PMID: 26135106  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5553-8. eCollection 2015.

The role of leptin in the ventricular remodeling process and its mechanism.

Zuo G(1), Du X(1), Zheng L(1), Wang C(1), Wang K(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Fifth Central Hospital No. 41 Zhejiang Road,
Tianjin 300450, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the role of leptin in the ventricular
remodeling process and its mechanism in the diabetic rats' model.
METHODS: The diabetic SD rats model induced by streptozotocin was established.
The SD rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: control group (20 rats treated
with citric acid/sodium citrate buffer); M0 group (10 rats treated with
physiological saline); M1 group (10 rats treated with 50 Î¼g/kg LP); M2 group (10 
rats treated with 100 Î¼g/kg LP). Ang-II was detected by ELISA. The expression
levels of LP and Ob-Rb were detected by RT-PCR. MAPK phosphorylation changes were
detected by western blotting. Myocardial morphology was observed.
RESULTS: Compared with control group, the blood glucose concentration and Ang-II 
significantly increased in diabetic model groups (P < 0.01) and body weight
decreased (P < 0.05). The expression levels of LP and Ob-Rb increased and heart
function decreased in diabetic model groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LP may be involved in the myocardial cell hypertrophy through the
neuroendocrine system and associated with the JAK-STAT, Ras-Raf-MEK-MAPK and
PI-3K signaling pathway, which provides a new concept for the pathogenesis of
cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC4483875
PMID: 26131137  [PubMed]


16. EJNMMI Res. 2014 Dec;4(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13550-014-0034-6. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Evaluation of efficacy of a new MEK inhibitor, RO4987655, in human tumor
xenografts by [(18)F] FDG-PET imaging combined with proteomic approaches.

Tegnebratt T(1), Ruge E, Bader S, Ishii N, Aida S, Yoshimura Y, Ooi CH, Lu L,
Mitsios N, Meresse V, Mulder J, Pawlak M, Venturi M, Tessier J, Stone-Elander S.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet and Department of Neuroradiology, R3:00, MicroPET and
Clinical Neurosciences, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 17176, Sweden,
tetyana.tegnebratt@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK, also known as
MAPK2, MAPKK), a key molecule of the Ras/MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) 
pathway, has shown promising effects on B-raf-mutated and some RAS (rat
sarcoma)-activated tumors in clinical trials. The objective of this study is to
examine the efficacy of a novel allosteric MEK inhibitor RO4987655 in
K-ras-mutated human tumor xenograft models using [(18)F] FDG-PET imaging and
proteomics technology.
METHODS: [(18)F] FDG uptake was studied in human lung carcinoma xenografts from
day 0 to day 9 of RO4987655 therapy using microPET Focus 120 (CTI Concorde
Microsystems, Knoxville, TN, USA). The expression levels of GLUT1 and hexokinase 
1 were examined using semi-quantitative fluorescent immunohistochemistry (fIHC). 
The in vivo effects of RO4987655 on MAPK/PI3K pathway components were assessed by
reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA).
RESULTS: We have observed modest metabolic decreases in tumor [(18)F] FDG uptake 
after MEK inhibition by RO4987655 as early as 2 h post-treatment. The greatest
[(18)F] FDG decreases were found on day 1, followed by a rebound in [(18)F] FDG
uptake on day 3 in parallel with decreasing tumor volumes. Molecular analysis of 
the tumors by fIHC did not reveal statistically significant correlations of GLUT1
and hexokinase 1 expressions with the [(18)F] FDG changes. RPPA signaling
response profiling revealed not only down-regulation of pERK1/2, pMKK4, and pmTOR
on day 1 after RO4987655 treatment but also significant up-regulation of pMEK1/2,
pMEK2, pC-RAF, and pAKT on day 3. The up-regulation of these markers is
interpreted to be indicative of a reactivation of the MAPK and activation of the 
compensatory PI3K pathway, which can also explain the rebound in [(18)F] FDG
uptake following MEK inhibition with RO4987655 in the K-ras-mutated human tumor
xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS: We have performed the first preclinical evaluation of a new MEK
inhibitor, RO4987655, using a combination of [(18)F] FDG-PET imaging and
molecular proteomics. These results provide support for using preclinical [(18)F]
FDG-PET imaging in early, non-invasive monitoring of the effects of MEK and
perhaps other Ras/MAPK signaling pathway inhibitors, which should facilitate a
wider implementation of clinical [(18)F] FDG-PET to optimize their clinical use.

PMCID: PMC4452660
PMID: 26116108  [PubMed]


17. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jun 25. [Epub ahead of print]

The comparison between dual inhibition of mTOR with MAPK and PI3K signaling
pathways in KRAS mutant NSCLC cell lines.

Dogan Turacli I(1), Ozkan AC(2), Ekmekci A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Ufuk
University, Ankara, Turkey. iremdgn@yahoo.com. (2)Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.

KRAS mutations are found in 15-25 % of patients with lung adenocarcinoma, and
they lead to constitutive activation of KRAS signaling pathway that results in
sustained cell proliferation. Currently, there are no direct anti-KRAS therapies 
available. Therefore, it is rational to target the downstream molecules of KRAS
signaling pathway, which are mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
pathway (RAF-MEK-ERK) and PI3K pathway (PI3K-AKT-mTOR). Here, we examined the
inhibition of both these pathways alone and in combination and analyzed the
anti-proliferative and apoptotic events in KRAS mutant NSCLC cell lines, A549 and
Calu-1. Cytotoxicity was determined by MTT assay after the cells were treated
with LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor), U0126 (MEK inhibitor), and RAD001 (mTOR
inhibitor) for 24 and 48 h. The expression levels of p-ERK, ERK, AKT, p-AKT, p53,
cyclinD1, c-myc, p27(kip1), BAX, BIM, and GAPDH were detected by western blot
after 6 and 24 h treatment. Although PI3K/mTOR inhibition is more effective in
cytotoxicity in A549 and Calu-1 cells, MEK/mTOR inhibition markedly decreases
cell proliferation protein marker expressions. Our data show that combined
targeting of MEK and PI3K-AKT with mTOR is a better option than single agents
alone for KRAS mutant NSCLC, thus opening the possibility of a beneficial
treatment strategy in the future.

PMID: 26108998  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Jul;152(2):337-46. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3458-4. 
Epub 2015 Jun 24.

CIB1 depletion impairs cell survival and tumor growth in triple-negative breast
cancer.

Black JL(1), Harrell JC, Leisner TM, Fellmeth MJ, George SD, Reinhold D, Baker
NM, Jones CD, Der CJ, Perou CM, Parise LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, 120
Mason Farm Rd Ste 3010, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive breast cancer subtype with 
generally poor prognosis and no available targeted therapies, highlighting a
critical unmet need to identify and characterize novel therapeutic targets. We
previously demonstrated that CIB1 is necessary for cancer cell survival and
proliferation via regulation of two oncogenic signaling pathways, RAF-MEK-ERK and
PI3K-AKT. Because these pathways are often upregulated in TNBC, we hypothesized
that CIB1 may play a broader role in TNBC cell survival and tumor growth. Methods
utilized include inducible RNAi depletion of CIB1 in vitro and in vivo,
immunoblotting, clonogenic assay, flow cytometry, RNA-sequencing, bioinformatics 
analysis, and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. CIB1 depletion resulted in
significant cell death in 8 of 11 TNBC cell lines tested. Analysis of components 
related to PI3K-AKT and RAF-MEK-ERK signaling revealed that elevated AKT
activation status and low PTEN expression were key predictors of sensitivity to
CIB1 depletion. Furthermore, CIB1 knockdown caused dramatic shrinkage of
MDA-MB-468 xenograft tumors in vivo. RNA sequence analysis also showed that CIB1 
depletion in TNBC cells activates gene programs associated with decreased
proliferation and increased cell death. CIB1 expression levels per se did not
predict TNBC susceptibility to CIB1 depletion, and CIB1 mRNA expression levels
did not associate with TNBC patient survival. Our data are consistent with the
emerging concept of non-oncogene addiction, where a large subset of TNBCs depend 
on CIB1 for cell survival and tumor growth, independent of CIB1 expression
levels. Our data establish CIB1 as a novel therapeutic target for TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4516161 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26105795  [PubMed - in process]


19. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 15;5(4):1308-18. eCollection 2015.

Mogrol represents a novel leukemia therapeutic, via ERK and STAT3 inhibition.

Liu C(1), Zeng Y(2), Dai LH(2), Cai TY(3), Zhu YM(2), Dou DQ(3), Ma LQ(4), Sun
YX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing University of Agriculture Beijing 102206, China ; National Engineering
Laboratory for Industrial Enzymes, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences Tianjin 300308, China ; Key Laboratory of Urban
Agriculture (North) of Ministry of Agriculture P. R. China, Beijing University of
Agriculture Beijing 102206, China. (2)National Engineering Laboratory for
Industrial Enzymes, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences Tianjin 300308, China. (3)Beijing University of Agriculture
Beijing 102206, China. (4)Beijing University of Agriculture Beijing 102206, China
; Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (North) of Ministry of Agriculture P. R.
China, Beijing University of Agriculture Beijing 102206, China.

Unlike solid tumors, the primary strategy for leukemia treatment is chemotherapy.
However, leukemia chemotherapy is associated with adverse drug effects and drug
resistance. Therefore, it is imperative to identify novel agents that effectively
treat leukemia while minimizing adverse effects. The Raf/MEK/extracellular
regulated kinase (ERK) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) pathways have been implicated in leukemia carcinogenesis, and provide
novel molecular targets for therapeutic intervention in cancer. Mogrol, a
biometabolite of mogrosides found in Siraitia grosvenorii, has exhibited
anti-cancer activities; however, the underlying mechanism of this effect remains 
unclear. To clarify its anti-cancer activity and mechanism of action, we treated 
K562 leukemia cells with mogrol. Mogrol suppressed leukemia cell growth via
inhibition of the ERK1/2 and STAT3 pathways, in particular, through the
suppression of p-ERK1/2 and p-STAT3. Inhibition of these pathways suppressed
Bcl-2 expression, thereby inducing K562 cell apoptosis. Furthermore, mogrol
enhanced p21 expression, resulting in G0/G1 cell cycle arrest. The findings
provide new perspectives regarding the role of mogrol in leukemia treatment.

PMCID: PMC4473312
PMID: 26101699  [PubMed]


20. J Surg Res. 2015 May 29. pii: S0022-4804(15)00654-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jss.2015.05.043. [Epub ahead of print]

Melatonin attenuates hepatic ischemia through mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling.

Gim SA(1), Koh PO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Institute of
Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, South Korea. (2)Department
of Anatomy, College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Institute of Life Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, South Korea. Electronic address:
pokoh@gnu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Melatonin exerts a protective effect during hepatic
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury through modulation of the apoptotic cell death 
program. Mitogen-activated protein kinases mediate various intracellular
processes such as cell differentiation, survival, and death. This study
investigated whether melatonin exerts a protective effect through the activation 
of Raf-MEK-ERK and its downstream targets, including 90 ribosomal S6 kinase
(p90RSK) and Bad, during hepatic I/R damage.
METHODS: Hepatic ischemia was induced in mice by occlusion of the hepatic artery,
portal vein, and bile duct. Adult mice were subjected to 1 h of hepatic ischemia 
and 3 h of reperfusion. Vehicle or melatonin (10 mg/kg, intraperitoneal) was
injected 15 min before ischemia and just before reperfusion. Serum aspartate
aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels were measured, and terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling histochemistry was performed.
Moreover, Western blot and immunoprecipitation analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Melatonin treatment attenuated hepatic I/R-induced increases in alanine 
aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels and also ameliorated
hepatic injury-induced pathologic lesions and increases of positive terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling staining in hepatic tissues. 
Hepatic I/R injury induced decreases in the phosphorylation of Raf-1, MEK1/2, and
extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, whereas melatonin attenuated decreases
in these phosphorylation levels. Moreover, melatonin prevented the injury-induced
decreases in phosphorylation of downstream targets, p90RSK and Bad.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the interaction between phospho-Bad and 
14-3-3 was decreased in vehicle-treated animals, while melatonin prevented this
decrease. Melatonin also attenuated the injury-induced increase in cleaved
caspase-3. In cultured hepatocytes, melatonin treatment prevented the hydrogen
peroxide-induced cell death and decrease in phosphorylation of ERK1/2. Moreover, 
blocking MEK by PD98059 attenuated the effect of melatonin.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that melatonin protects hepatic cells against
hepatic I/R damage through the activation of the Raf-MEK-ERK cascade and
phosphorylation of its downstream targets.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26101163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

1. Front Immunol. 2015 Jul 8;6:340. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00340. eCollection 2015.

Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Chronic Kidney Disease with Diabetes
Mellitus and Cardiovascular Diseases as Its Comorbidities.

Gajjala PR(1), Sanati M(1), Jankowski J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research, UniversitÃ¤tsklinikum RWTH
Aachen , Aachen , Germany.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD), diabetes mellitus (DM), and cardiovascular diseases
(CVD) are complex disorders of partly unknown genesis and mostly known
progression factors. CVD and DM are the risk factors of CKD and are strongly
intertwined since DM can lead to both CKD and/or CVD, and CVD can lead to kidney 
disease. In recent years, our knowledge of CKD, DM, and CVD has been expanded and
several important experimental, clinical, and epidemiological associations have
been reported. The tight cellular and molecular interactions between the renal,
diabetic, and cardiovascular systems in acute or chronic disease settings are
becoming increasingly evident. However, the (patho-) physiological basis of the
interactions of CKD, DM, and CVD with involvement of multiple endogenous and
environmental factors is highly complex and our knowledge is still at its
infancy. Not only single pathways and mediators of progression of these diseases 
have to be considered in these processes but also the mutual interactions of
these factors are essential. The recent advances in proteomics and integrative
analysis technologies have allowed rapid progress in analyzing complex disorders 
and clearly show the opportunity for new efficient and specific therapies. More
than a dozen pathways have been identified so far, including hyperactivity of the
renin-angiotensin (RAS)-aldosterone system, osmotic sodium retention, endothelial
dysfunction, dyslipidemia, RAS/RAF/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase pathway,
modification of the purinergic system, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI
3-kinase)-dependent signaling pathways, and inflammation, all leading to
histomorphological alterations of the kidney and vessels of diabetic and
non-diabetic patients. Since a better understanding of the common cellular and
molecular mechanisms of these diseases may be a key to successful identification 
of new therapeutic targets, we review in this paper the current literature about 
cellular and molecular mechanisms of CKD.

PMCID: PMC4495338
PMID: 26217336  [PubMed]


2. Nat Prod Res. 2015 Jul 27:1-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Anticancer activity of Ophiobolin A, isolated from the endophytic fungus
Bipolaris setariae.

Bhatia DR(1), Dhar P, Mutalik V, Deshmukh SK, Verekar SA, Desai DC, Kshirsagar R,
Thiagarajan P, Agarwal V.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology , Piramal Enterprises Limited , Mumbai ,
Maharashtra , India.

The present work describes the anticancer activity of Ophiobolin A isolated from 
the endophytic fungus Bipolaris setariae. Ophiobolin A was isolated using
preparative HPLC and its structure was confirmed by HRMS, (1)H NMR, (13)C NMR,
COSY, DEPT, HSQC and HMBC. It inhibited solid and haematological cancer cell
proliferation with IC50 of 0.4-4.3 Î¼M. In comparison, IC50 against normal cells
was 20.9 Î¼M. It was found to inhibit the phosphorylation of S6
(IC50 = 1.9 Â± 0.2 Î¼M), ERK (IC50 = 0.28 Â± 0.02 Î¼M) and RB (IC50 = 1.42 Â± 0.1 Î¼M),
the effector proteins of PI3K/mTOR, Ras/Raf/ERK and CDK/RB pathways,
respectively. It induced apoptosis and inhibited cell cycle progression in
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells with concomitant inhibition of signalling proteins. Thus,
this study reveals that anticancer activity of Ophiobolin A is associated with
simultaneous inhibition of multiple oncogenic signalling pathways namely
PI3K/mTOR, Ras/Raf/ERK and CDK/RB.

PMID: 26212208  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Signal. 2015 Jul 21. pii: S0898-6568(15)00211-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.07.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Apoptotic induction by lovastatin and Î³-tocotrienol in HL-60 cells via
Ras/ERK/NF-ÎºB and Ras/Akt/NF-ÎºB signaling dependent down-regulation of glyoxalase
1 and HMG-CoA reductase.

Chen CC(1), Liu TY(2), Huang SP(3), Ho CT(4), Huang TC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, National Pingtung University of Science and
Technology, Pingtung 91201, Taiwan. Electronic address: tkc720901@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Pingtung University 
of Science and Technology, Pingtung 91201, Taiwan. Electronic address:
yubaby118@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Biological Science and Technology,
National Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung 91201, Taiwan.
Electronic address: wenily0617@gmail.com. (4)Department of Food Science, Rutgers 
University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. Electronic address:
ho@aesop.rutgers.edu. (5)Department of Food Science, National Pingtung University
of Science and Technology, Pingtung 91201, Taiwan; Department of Biological
Science and Technology, National Pingtung University of Science and Technology,
Pingtung 91201, Taiwan. Electronic address: tchuang@mail.npust.edu.tw.

Glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) and HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR) are highly expressed in most
tumor cells and little in normal cells. In this study, treatment of HL-60 cells
with lovastatin induced characteristic apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. We
demonstrated that lovastatin treatment inhibited Ras and Raf protein
translocation to cell membrane and eliminated the phosphorylation of the
downstream effectors Akt and ERK, and the subsequent NF-ÎºB translocation into
nucleus. Specific inhibitors and Î³-tocotrienol confirmed the
Ras/Raf/ERK/NF-ÎºB/GLO1 and Ras/Akt/NF-ÎºB/GLO1 pathways. Data revealed that
lovastatin induced HL-60 cell death was attenuated by mevalonate treatment. We
demonstrated also that Î³-tocotrienol showed its apoptotic effect on the HL-60
cell through the same pathway. Î³-Tocotrienol enhanced the apoptotic effect of
lovastatin through the down-regulation of GLO1 and HMGCR resulting in an increase
of methylglyoxal and a decrease of cholesterol and led to the apoptosis of HL-60 
cells.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26208883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Jul 21. pii: S1043-6618(15)00143-7. doi:
10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.010. [Epub ahead of print]

A historical overview of protein kinases and their targeted small molecule
inhibitors.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742-8814, United States. Electronic address: rrj@brimr.org.

Protein kinases play a predominant regulatory role in nearly every aspect of cell
biology and they can modify the function of a protein in almost every conceivable
way. Protein phosphorylation can increase or decrease enzyme activity and it can 
alter other biological activities such as transcription and translation.
Moreover, some phosphorylation sites on a given protein are stimulatory while
others are inhibitory. The human protein kinase gene family consists of 518
members along with 106 pseudogenes. Furthermore, about 50 of the 518 gene
products lack important catalytic residues and are called protein pseudokinases. 
The non-catalytic allosteric interaction of protein kinases and pseudokinases
with other proteins has added an important regulatory feature to the biochemistry
and cell biology of the protein kinase superfamily. With rare exceptions, a
divalent cation such as Mg(2+) is required for the reaction. All protein kinases 
exist in a basal state and are activated only as necessary by divergent
regulatory stimuli. The mechanisms for switching between dormant and active
protein kinases can be intricate. Phosphorylase kinase was the first protein
kinase to be characterized biochemically and the mechanism of its regulation led 
to the discovery of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A, or PKA),
which catalyzes the phosphorylation and activation of phosphorylase kinase. This 
was the first protein kinase cascade or signaling module to be elucidated. The
epidermal growth factor receptor-Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling module contains
protein-tyrosine, protein-serine/threonine, and dual specificity protein kinases.
PKA has served as a prototype of this enzyme family and more is known about this 
enzyme than any other protein kinase. The inactive PKA holoenzyme consists of two
regulatory and two catalytic subunits. After binding four molecules of cAMP, the 
holoenzyme dissociates into a regulatory subunit dimer (each monomer binds two
cAMP) and two free and active catalytic subunits. PKA and all other protein
kinase domains have a small amino-terminal lobe and large carboxyterminal lobe as
determined by X-ray crystallography. The N-lobe and C-lobe form a cleft that
serves as a docking site for MgATP. Nearly all active protein kinases contain a
K/E/D/D signature sequence that plays important structural and catalytic roles.
Protein kinases contain hydrophobic catalytic and regulatory spines and
collateral shell residues that are required to assemble the active enzyme. There 
are two general kinds of conformational changes associated with most protein
kinases. The first conformational change involves the formation of an intact
regulatory spine to form an active enzyme. The second conformational change
occurs in active kinases as they toggle between open and closed conformations
during their catalytic cycles. Because mutations and dysregulation of protein
kinases play causal roles in human disease, this family of enzymes has become one
of the most important drug targets over the past two decades. Imatinib was
approved by the United States FDA for the treatment of chronic myelogenous
leukemia in 2001; this small molecule inhibits the BCR-Abl protein kinase
oncoprotein that results from the formation of the Philadelphia chromosome. More 
than two dozen other orally effective mechanism-based small molecule protein
kinase inhibitors have been subsequently approved by the FDA. These drugs bind to
the ATP-binding site of their target enzymes and extend into nearby hydrophobic
pockets. Most of these protein kinase inhibitors prolong survival in cancer
patients only weeks or months longer than standard cytotoxic therapies. In
contrast, the clinical effectiveness of imatinib against chronic myelogenous
leukemia is vastly superior to that of any other targeted protein kinase
inhibitor with overall survival lasting a decade or more. However, the near
universal and expected development of drug resistance in the treatment of
neoplastic disorders requires new approaches to solve this therapeutic challenge.
Cancer is the predominant indication for these drugs, but disease targets are
increasing. For example, we can expect the approval of new drugs inhibiting other
protein kinases in the treatment of illnesses such as hypertension, Parkinson's
disease, and autoimmune diseases.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26207888  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Jul 6;69(0):729-43. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1160360.

CNC proteins in physiology and pathology.

GÄgotek A(1), Skrzydlewska E(1).

Author information: 
(1)ZakÅad Chemii Nieorganicznej i Analitycznej, Uniwersytet Medyczny w
BiaÅymstoku.

CNC proteins consist of Bach1, Bach2 and 4 homologous transcription factors:
Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3 and p45NF-E2. Transcription factors belonging to this group of
proteins play a crucial role in protection of cells against oxidative stress.
Under physiological conditions, they remain in the cytoplasm in the inactive form
or are degraded. However, in oxidative stress conditions, they are translocated
to the nucleus, and bind to DNA in the ARE sequence. Consequently, there is
transcription of genes encoding cytoprotective proteins, such as phase II
enzymes, or low molecular weight antioxidant proteins (i.e., thioredoxin,
ferritin, metallothionein) responsible for protecting cells from reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) action. The activity of transcriptional proteins depends directly
on the redox state of the cell. ROS as second messenger signals, control
inhibitors of cytoplasmic CNC proteins or potentiate the activity of kinases
(MAPK, PKC, PI3K, PERK), leading to phosphorylation of transcription factors.
This is conducive to translocation of these molecules into the nucleus and to
formation of complexes that initiate the gene expression. Disorders of regulation
of the activity of transcription factors belonging to the CNC proteins caused by 
gene mutations, epigenetic modifications or increased activity of p62, p21, or
k-Ras, B-Raf and c-Myc oncogenes, induce changes in the level of ARE-dependent
gene expression, which can lead even to the development of carcinogenesis. On the
other hand, Nrf transcription factors, inducing the expression of antioxidants
and enzymes responsible for the detoxification of xenobiotics, can be considered 
as a potential target of the action of chemopreventive factors in anticancer
therapy.

PMID: 26206989  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jul 22;14:135. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0399-9.

3-BrPA eliminates human bladder cancer cells with highly oncogenic signatures via
engagement of specific death programs and perturbation of multiple signaling and 
metabolic determinants.

Konstantakou EG(1), Voutsinas GE(2), Velentzas AD(3), Basogianni AS(4), Paronis
E(5), Balafas E(6), Kostomitsopoulos N(7), Syrigos KN(8,)(9), Anastasiadou E(10),
Stravopodis DJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of
Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Zografou 15784, Athens, Greece. eumokon@biol.uoa.gr.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Mutagenesis and Carcinogenesis, Institute of
Biosciences and Applications, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece.
mvoutsin@bio.demokritos.gr. (3)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty
of Biology, University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Zografou 15784, Athens,
Greece. tveletz@biol.uoa.gr. (4)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics,
Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Zografou 15784,
Athens, Greece. stefania.basogianni@stud.ki.se. (5)Center of Clinical,
Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation
of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece. eparonis@bioacademy.gr. (6)Center of
Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research
Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece. vbalafas@bioacademy.gr.
(7)Center of Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
nkostom@bioacademy.gr. (8)Oncology Unit GPP, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens
School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. ksyrigos@med.uoa.gr. (9)Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. ksyrigos@med.uoa.gr. (10)Center of Basic
Research, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens,
Greece. anastasiadou@bioacademy.gr. (11)Department of Cell Biology and
Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Zografou
15784, Athens, Greece. dstravop@biol.uoa.gr.

BACKGROUND: Urinary bladder cancer is one of the most fatal and expensive
diseases of industrialized world. Despite the strenuous efforts, no seminal
advances have been achieved for its clinical management. Given the importance of 
metabolic reprogramming in cancer cell survival and growth, we have herein
employed 3-BrPA, a halogenated derivative of pyruvate and historically considered
inhibitor of glycolysis, to eliminate bladder cancer cells with highly oncogenic 
molecular signatures.
METHODS: Bladder cancer cells were exposed to 3-BrPA in the absence or presence
of several specific inhibitors. Cell viability was determined by MTT and
flow-cytometry assays; cell death, signaling activity and metabolic integrity by 
Western blotting and immunofluorescence; mutant-gene profiling by DNA sequencing;
and gene expression by RT-sqPCR.
RESULTS: 3-BrPA could activate dose-dependent apoptosis (type 1 PCD) and
regulated necrosis (type 3 PCD) of T24 (grade III; H-Ras(G12V); p53(ÎY126)), but 
not RT4 (grade I), cells, with PARP, MLKL, Drp1 and Nec-7-targeted components
critically orchestrating necrotic death. However, similarly to RIPK1 and CypD,
p53 presented with non-essential contribution to 3-BrPA-induced cellular
collapse, while reactivation of mutant p53 with PRIMA-1 resulted in strong
synergism of the two agents. Given the reduced expression of MPC components
(likely imposing mitochondrial dysfunction) in T24 cells, the suppression of
constitutive autophagy (required by cells carrying oncogenic Ras; also, type 2
PCD) and derangement of glucose-homeostasis determinants by 3-BrPA critically
contribute to drug-directed depletion of ATP cellular stores. This bioenergetic
crisis is translated to severe dysregulation of Akt/FoxO/GSK-3, mTOR/S6, AMPK and
MAPK (p44/42, p38 and SAPK/JNK) signaling pathways in 3-BrPA-treated T24 cells.
Sensitivity to 3-BrPA (and tolerance to glucose deprivation) does not rely on
B-Raf(V600E) or K-Ras(G13D) mutant oncogenic proteins, but partly depends on
aberrant signaling activities of Akt, MAPK and AMPK kinases. Interestingly, MCT1-
and macropinocytosis-mediated influx of 3-BrPA in T24 represents the principal
mechanism that regulates cellular responsiveness to the drug. Besides its
capacity to affect transcription in gene-dependent manner, 3-BrPA can also induce
GLUT4-specific splicing silencing in both sensitive and resistant cells, thus
dictating alternative routes of drug trafficking.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, it seems that 3-BrPA represents a promising agent for
bladder cancer targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC4511243
PMID: 26198749  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015 Jul 16. pii: S0190-9622(15)01745-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2015.06.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Melanocytic nevi excised during B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF) inhibitor therapy: A 
study of 19 lesions from 10 patients.

Mochel MC(1), Hammond MR(2), Frederick DT(2), Alora-Palli MB(3), Piris A(4),
Flaherty KT(5), Hoang MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Department of
Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
Electronic address: mhoang@mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: There are limited descriptions of histopathology and immune profiles 
of new or changing melanocytic nevi in the setting of B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF)
inhibitor therapy.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify their distinctive features.
METHODS: Clinical charts and histologic review, neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras)
oncogene homolog genotyping, and immunohistochemistry for HMB-45, BRAFV600E,
phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (pERK), phosphorylated
protein kinase B, CD4, and CD8 were performed on 19 melanocytic nevi from 10
patients and 23 control nevi.
RESULTS: BRAF inhibitors were administered for metastatic melanoma (7), colonic
adenocarcinoma (2), and papillary thyroid carcinoma (1). The average duration of 
BRAF inhibition before lesion excision was 8 months. Frequently associated
histologic features included pigmentation of the stratum corneum, hyperpigmented 
keratinocytes, dermal melanophages, and deep HMB-45 expression. The lesions were 
BRAFV600E and neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras) oncogene homolog wild-type,
expressed diffuse weak-moderate pERK, and possessed a predominance of CD8(+) in
comparison with CD4(+) T lymphocytes within the dermal infiltrates.
LIMITATION: This is a retrospective study of a small and heterogeneous group.
CONCLUSION: The nevi associated with BRAF inhibitor therapy invariably lack
BRAFV600E mutation. BRAF inhibition appears to cause an increased cytotoxic
T-cell response and increased mitogen-activated protein kinase activity in BRAF
wild-type lesions, supported by pERK expression, possibly resulting in an
activated phenotype characterized by increased melanin pigmentation and deep
HMB-45 expression.

Copyright Â© 2015 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26190239  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jul 14. pii: S0014-4827(15)30043-4. doi:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.07.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential effects of polyoma virus middle tumor antigen mutants upon gap
junctional, intercellular communication.

Geletu M(1), Guy S(1), Greer S(1), Raptis L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences and Department of Pathology
and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences and Department of Pathology
and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6.
Electronic address: raptisl@queensu.ca.

Gap junctions are channels that connect the cytoplasm of adjacent cells.
Oncogenes such as the middle Tumor antigen of polyoma virus (mT) are known to
suppress gap junctional, intercellular communication (GJIC). mT associates with
and is tyrosine-phosphorylated by cSrc family members. Specific mT
phosphotyrosines provide docking sites for the phosphotyrosine binding domain of 
Shc (mT-tyr250) or the SH2 domain of the regulatory subunit of the
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3k, mT-tyr315). Binding results in the
activation of their downstream signaling cascades, Ras/Raf/Erk and PI3
kinase/Akt, respectively, both of which are needed for full neoplastic
transformation. To examine the effect of mT-initiated pathways upon gap
junctional communication, GJIC was quantitated in rat liver epithelial T51B cells
expressing mT-mutants, using a novel technique of in situ electroporation. The
results demonstrate for the first time that, although even low levels of
wild-type mT are sufficient to interrupt gap junctional communication, GJIC
suppression still requires an intact tyr-250 site, that is activation of the Ras 
pathway. In sharp contrast, activation of the PI3k pathway is not required for
GJIC suppression, indicating that GJIC suppression is independent of full
neoplastic conversion and the concomitant morphological changes. Interestingly,
expression of a constitutively active, myristylated form of the catalytic subunit
of PI3k, p110, or the constitutively active mutants E545K and H1047R increased
GJIC, while pharmacological inhibition of PI3k eliminated communication.
Therefore, although PI3k is growth promoting and in an activated form it can act 
as an oncogene, it actually plays a positive role upon gap junctional,
intercellular communication.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187405  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Jul 17;5:e324. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.52.

Peripheral blood cells from children with RASopathies show enhanced spontaneous
colonies growth in vitro and hyperactive RAS signaling.

Gaipa G(1), Bugarin C(1), Cianci P(2), Sarno J(1), Bonaccorso P(3), Biondi A(4), 
Selicorni A(2).

Author information: 
(1)M. Tettamanti Research Centre, Pediatric Clinic, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Monza, Italy. (2)Pediatrics Clinical Genetics, MBBM-AO San Gerardo Foundation,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. (3)1] M. Tettamanti Research Centre, 
Pediatric Clinic, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy [2] Center of
Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Azienda Policlinico-OVE, University of Catania,
Catania, Italy. (4)1] M. Tettamanti Research Centre, Pediatric Clinic, University
of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy [2] Pediatrics Clinical Genetics, MBBM-AO San
Gerardo Foundation, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.

Germline mutations in genes coding for molecules involved in the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK 
pathway are the hallmarks of a newly classified family of autosomal dominant
syndromes termed RASopathies. Myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), in particular,
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, can lead to potentially severe complications in
children with Noonan syndrome (NS). We studied 27 children with NS or other
RASopathies and 35 age-matched children as control subjects. Peripheral blood
(PB) cells from these patients were studied for in vitro colony-forming units
(CFUs) activity, as well as for intracellular phosphosignaling. Higher
spontaneous growth of both burst-forming units-erythroid (BFU-E) and
CFU-granulocyte/macrophage (CFU-GM) colonies from RAS-mutated patients were
observed as compared with control subjects. We also observed a significantly
higher amount of GM-colony-stimulating factor-induced p-ERK in children with
RASopathies. Our findings demonstrate for the first time that PB cells isolated
from children suffering from NS or other RASopathies without MPD display enhanced
BFU-E and CFU-GM colony formation in vitro. The biological significance of these 
findings clearly awaits further studies. Collectively, our data provide a basis
for further investigating of only partially characterized hematological
alterations present in children suffering from RASopathies, and may provide new
markers for progression toward malignant MPD in these patients.

PMID: 26186557  [PubMed - in process]


10. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jul 14. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12395. [Epub ahead of
print]

A (heat) shocking development: FBXW7 loss unleashes HSF1 to drive melanoma
invasion and metastasis.

Cho E, Grim JE.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer because of its strong tendency for 
local invasion, distant metastasis, and resistance to traditional cytotoxic
chemotherapy. A more complete understanding of the genetic landscape of melanoma 
will define and clarify the molecular pathways that drive tumor growth and will
also reveal new therapeutic targets. Indeed, this is already being borne out:
multiple studies have demonstrated that activating mutations in components of the
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway occur in over half of melanoma tumor samples and targeted
inhibitors of this pathway are currently used to treat patients with these
cancers. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26178611  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Discov Med. 2015 Jun;19(107):455-61.

Novel mechanisms and therapeutic approaches in melanoma: targeting the MAPK
pathway.

Grimaldi AM(1), Simeone E, Festino L, Vanella V, Palla M, Ascierto PA.

Author information: 
(1)O.U. Melanoma, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, National Cancer 
Institute of Naples "G. Pascale" Foundation, Naples, Italy.

The development of novel treatments that selectively inhibit the RAS-RAF-MAPK
pathway represents a milestone in the history of melanoma treatment. BRAF
mutations occur in approximately 45% of cutaneous melanomas, while mutations in
NRAS occur in 15-25%. Vemurafenib was the first BRAF inhibitor to be approved in 
2011, based on the results of a phase III trial (BRIM-3) that showed higher
progression-free survival and overall survival compared with dacarbazine
chemotherapy in metastatic BRAF-mutated melanoma. Dabrafenib, another BRAF
inhibitor, has shown similar results and was approved in 2013. Preclinical
studies suggested that another novel group of agents, the MEK inhibitors, showed 
stronger inhibition of both mutated BRAF and NRAS cell cultures than vemurafenib.
Trametinib was the first MEK inhibitor approved in 2014, both as a single agent
and in combination with dabrafenib for the treatment of advanced BRAF-mutated
melanoma. Other MEK inhibitors are also in development. Concomitant inhibition of
both MEK and BRAF has shown more durable and greater tumor response than BRAF
monotherapy, by overcoming the multiple genetic mechanisms of escape. Combined
therapy prevents the development of acquired resistance as well as decreasing
cutaneous toxicity secondary to paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway
induced by BRAF inhibitors. Various combinations of BRAF and MEK inhibitors have 
shown promising results. Moreover, triple combination therapies involved other
agents with novel mechanisms of action are also being evaluated. These and other 
combination strategies involving immunotherapies and targeted therapies offer the
hope of improving outcomes beyond those already achieved with anti-BRAF
treatments.

PMID: 26175403  [PubMed - in process]


12. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:203978. doi: 10.1155/2015/203978. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

A Novel Matrine Derivative WM130 Inhibits Activation of Hepatic Stellate Cells
and Attenuates Dimethylnitrosamine-Induced Liver Fibrosis in Rats.

Xu Y(1), Peng Z(1), Ji W(1), Li X(2), Lin X(1), Qian L(3), Li X(1), Chai X(2), Wu
Q(2), Gao Q(4), Su C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital and
National Center of Liver Cancer, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200438, China. (2)Deparment of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Department of Molecular Oncology, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital and National Center of Liver Cancer, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China ; Department of General
Surgery, Wujiang No. 1 People's Hospital, Suzhou 215200, China. (4)Department of 
General Surgery, Wujiang No. 1 People's Hospital, Suzhou 215200, China.

Activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) is a critical event in process of
hepatic fibrogenesis and cirrhosis. Matrine, the active ingredient of Sophora,
had been used for clinical treatment of acute/chronic liver disease. However, its
potency was low. We prepared a high potency and low toxicity matrine derivate,
WM130 (C30N4H40SO5F), which exhibited better pharmacological activities on
antihepatic fibrosis. This study demonstrated that WM130 results in a decreased
proliferative activity of HSC-T6 cells, with the half inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 68âÎ¼M. WM130 can inhibit the migration and induce apoptosis in HSC-T6
cells at both concentrations of 68âÎ¼M (IC50) and 34âÎ¼M (half IC50). The
expression of Î±-SMA, Collagen I, Collagen III, and TGF-Î²1 could be downregulated,
and the protein phosphorylation levels of EGFR, AKT, ERK, Smad, and Raf (p-EGFR, 
p-AKT, p-ERK, p-Smad, and p-Raf) were also decreased by WM130. On the DMN-induced
rat liver fibrosis model, WM130 can effectively reduce the TGF-Î²1, AKT, Î±-SMA,
and p-ERK levels, decrease the extracellular matrix (ECM) formation, and inhibit 
rat liver fibrosis progression. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that WM130
can significantly inhibit the activation of HSC-T6 cells and block the rat liver 
fibrosis progression by inducing apoptosis, suppressing the deposition of ECM,
and inhibiting TGF-Î²/Smad and Ras/ERK pathways.

PMCID: PMC4488526
PMID: 26167476  [PubMed - in process]


13. Radiother Oncol. 2015 Jul 8. pii: S0167-8140(15)00323-0. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2015.06.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Trametinib radiosensitises RAS- and BRAF-mutated melanoma by perturbing cell
cycle and inducing senescence.

Schick U(1), Kyula J(1), Barker H(1), Patel R(1), Zaidi S(1), Gregory C(1), Hafsi
H(1), Roulstone V(1), Deutsch E(2), McLaughlin M(1), Harrington K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (2)INSERM UMR 1030, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (3)Targeted
Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: Kevin.Harrington@icr.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Radiotherapy (RT) is used frequently in patients with melanoma, but
results are suboptimal because the disease is often radioresistant. This may be
due to constitutive activation of MAPK pathway signalling through mutations
involving RAS/RAF. Thus, we studied whether trametinib, a potent and selective
allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/2 could improve the efficacy of RT.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Clonogenic survival assays were performed in human
BRAF-mutant (A375), NRAS-mutant (D04, WM1631), KRAS-mutant (WM1791c) and
wild-type (PMWK) melanoma cell lines. The effects of trametinib with and without 
radiation on protein levels of MEK effectors were measured by immunoblot
analyses. Cell cycle effects, DNA damage repair, mitotic catastrophe and
senescence were measured using flow cytometry, Î³H2Ax staining, nuclear
fragmentation and Î²-galactosidase staining, respectively. Additionally, athymic
mice with D04 flank tumours were treated with fractionated RT after gavage with
trametinib and monitored for tumour growth.
RESULTS: All cell lines, except PMWK, exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity when RT was
combined with trametinib compared to either agent alone. Sensitiser enhancement
ratios were 1.70, 1.32, 1.10, and 1.70 for A375, D04, WM1361 and WM1791c,
respectively. Trametinib efficiently blocked RT-induced phosphorylation of ERK at
nanomolar concentrations. Increased radiosensitivity correlated with prolonged G1
arrest and reduction in the radioresistant S phase up to 48h following RT. A
larger population of senescence-activated Î²-galactosidase-positive cells was seen
in the trametinib pretreated group, and this correlated with activation of two of
the major mediators of induced senescence, p53 and pRb. Mice receiving the
combination treatment (trametinib 1mg/kg and RT over 3days) showed a reduced mean
tumour volume compared with mice receiving trametinib alone (p=0.016), or RT
alone (p=0.047). No overt signs of drug toxicity were observed.
CONCLUSION: Trametinib radiosensitised RAS-/RAF-mutated melanoma cells by
inducing prolonged G1 arrest and premature senescence. In this pre-clinical study
we demonstrate that combining trametinib and RT is well tolerated, and reduces
tumour growth in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26163092  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:641286. doi: 10.1155/2015/641286.
Epub 2015 Jun 16.

Effect of Repeated Electroacupuncture Intervention on Hippocampal ERK and p38MAPK
Signaling in Neuropathic Pain Rats.

Wang JY(1), Chen SP(1), Gao YH(1), Qiao LN(1), Zhang JL(1), Liu JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, China
Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.

Results of our past studies showed that hippocampal muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor (mAChR)-1 mRNA and differentially expressed proteins participating in
MAPK signaling were involved in electroacupuncture (EA) induced cumulative
analgesia in neuropathic pain rats, but the underlying intracellular mechanism
remains unknown. The present study was designed to observe the effect of EA
stimulation (EAS) on hippocampal extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) and
p38 MAPK signaling in rats with chronic constrictive injury (CCI) of the sciatic 
nerve, so as to reveal its related intracellular targets in pain relief. After
CCI, the thermal pain thresholds of the affected hind were significantly
decreased compared with the control group (P < 0.05). Following one and two
weeks' EAS of ST 36-GB34, the pain thresholds were significantly upregulated (P <
0.05), and the effect of EA2W was remarkably superior to that of EA2D and EA1W (P
< 0.05). Correspondingly, CCI-induced decreased expression levels of Ras, c-Raf, 
ERK1 and p-ERK1/2 proteins, and p38 MAPK mRNA and p-p38MAPK protein in the
hippocampus tissues were reversed by EA2W (P < 0.05). The above mentioned results
indicated that EA2W induced cumulative analgesic effect may be closely associated
with its function in removing neuropathic pain induced suppression of
intracellular ERK and p38MAPK signaling in the hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC4487344
PMID: 26161123  [PubMed]


15. J Biomed Sci. 2015 Jul 9;22(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0158-7.

The effects and mechanisms of SLC34A2 in tumorigenesis and progression of human
non-small cell lung cancer.

Wang Y(1), Yang W(2), Pu Q(3), Yang Y(4), Ye S(5), Ma Q(6), Ren J(7), Cao Z(8),
Zhong G(9), Zhang X(10), Liu L(11), Zhu W(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. wangyu_4932@163.com. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. younger1030@163.com. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37 Guo Xue Xiang, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. 
R. China. puqiang11@gmail.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. scu_yanyang@163.com.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. shiny9191@163.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. qingpingle2008@163.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. rjham@126.com. (8)State 
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th
Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu,
Sichuan, P. R. China. caozhixing007@163.com. (9)State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng
Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R.
China. guoxingzhong@gmail.com. (10)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer 
Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1, Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological
Development Zone, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. 42539791@qq.com.
(11)Department of Thoracic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 
37 Guo Xue Xiang, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. lunxu_liu@aliyun.com.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, NO. 1,
Keyuan 4th Road, Gaopeng Street, High Technological Development Zone, 610041,
Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China. zhuwen@scu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: SLC34A2 with highest expressions in lung, small intestine and kidney 
encoded a type 2b sodium-dependent phosphate transporter (NaPi-IIb). In lung,
SLC34A2 only expressed in the apical membrane of type II alveolar epithelium
cells (ATII cells) and played a pivotal role during the fetal lung development
and embryonic development. ATII cells acting as multifunctional stem cells might 
transform into NSCLC after undergoing exogenous or endogenous factors. Increasing
evidences showed that the genes performing critical roles during embryogenesis
were also expressed during the development of cancer. In addition, recent
research found the expression of SLC34A2 had a significant difference between the
surgical samples of NSCLC and normal tissues, and SLC34A2 was down-regulated in
lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549 and up-regulation expression of SLC34A2 could 
significantly inhibit cell viability and invasion of A549 in vitro. These results
suggested SLC34A2 might play an important role in the development of NSCLC.
However, the role of SLC34A2 in tumorigenesis and progression of NSCLC remains
unknown.
RESULTS: Our study found that SLC34A2 was also significantly down-regulated in
14/15 of examined NSCLC tissues. Moreover, we found that expressions of SLC34A2
were reduced in six NSCLC cell lines for the first time. Our result also revealed
a dramatic inhibitory effects of SLC34A2 on cell growth, migration and invasion
of several NSCLC cell lines. SLC34A2 also strongly inhibited tumor growth and
metastasis ability in A549 subcutaneous tumor model and lung metastasis model,
respectively. Further studies found that the suppressive effects of SLC34A2 on
tumorigenesis and progression might be associated with the down-regulation of
related protein in PI3K/Akt and Ras/Raf/MEK signal pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, our data indicated that SLC34A2 could exert
significantly suppressive effects on tumorigenesis and progression of NSCLC.
SLC34A2 might provide new insights for further understanding the early
pathogenesis of human NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4497375
PMID: 26156586  [PubMed - in process]


16. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2015 Jul;22(4):359-73. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2014.10.002. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

BRAF gene: From human cancers to developmental syndromes.

Hussain MR(1), Baig M(2), Mohamoud HS(3), Ulhaq Z(4), Hoessli DC(4), Khogeer
GS(5), Al-Sayed RR(5), Al-Aama JY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Genetic Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia ;
CAS-Institute of microbiology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China. (2)Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Rabigh Branch,
Saudi Arabia. (3)Human Genetics Research Centre, Division of Biomedical Sciences 
(BMS), St. George's University of London (SGUL), London, UK. (4)Dr. Panjwani
Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International Center for
Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biology, Genomics and Biotechnology Section, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (6)Faculty of Genetic Medicine, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The BRAF gene encodes for a serine/threonine protein kinase that participates in 
the MAPK/ERK signalling pathway and plays a vital role in cancers and
developmental syndromes (RASopathies). The current review discusses the clinical 
significance of the BRAF gene and other members of RAS/RAF cascade in human
cancers and RAS/MAPK syndromes, and focuses the molecular basis and clinical
genetics of BRAF to better understand its parallel involvement in both
tumourigenesis and RAS/MAPK syndromes-Noonan syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous
syndrome and LEOPARD syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4486731
PMID: 26150740  [PubMed]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3855-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510733112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

EGFR inhibition evokes innate drug resistance in lung cancer cells by preventing 
Akt activity and thus inactivating Ets-1 function.

Phuchareon J(1), McCormick F(2), Eisele DW(1), Tetsu O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), CA 94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. (2)UCSF Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu. (3)Head and
Neck Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), CA
94115; UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158 mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
osamu.tetsu@ucsf.edu.

Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
About 14% of NSCLCs harbor mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 
Despite remarkable progress in treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
only 5% of patients achieve tumor reduction >90%. The limited primary responses
are attributed partly to drug resistance inherent in the tumor cells before
therapy begins. Recent reports showed that activation of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) is an important determinant of this innate drug resistance. In
contrast, we demonstrate that EGFR inhibition promotes innate drug resistance
despite blockade of RTK activity in NSCLC cells. EGFR TKIs decrease both the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt protein kinase pathways for a
short time, after which the Ras/MAPK pathway becomes reactivated. Akt inhibition 
selectively blocks the transcriptional activation of Ets-1, which inhibits its
target gene, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), a negative regulator
specific for ERK1/2. As a result, ERK1/2 is activated. Furthermore, elevated
c-Src stimulates Ras GTP-loading and activates Raf and MEK kinases. These
observations suggest that not only ERK1/2 but also Akt activity is essential to
maintain Ets-1 in an active state. Therefore, despite high levels of ERK1/2,
Ets-1 target genes including DUSP6 and cyclins D1, D3, and E2 remain suppressed
by Akt inhibition. Reduction of DUSP6 in combination with elevated c-Src renews
activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway, which enhances cell survival by accelerating 
Bim protein turnover. Thus, EGFR TKIs evoke innate drug resistance by preventing 
Akt activity and inactivating Ets-1 function in NSCLC cells.

PMID: 26150526  [PubMed - in process]


18. JAMA Oncol. 2015 Jun;1(3):359-368.

Association Between NRAS and BRAF Mutational Status and Melanoma-Specific
Survival Among Patients With Higher Risk Primary Melanoma.

Thomas NE(1), Edmiston SN(1), Alexander A(1), Groben PA(1), Parrish E(1), Kricker
A(1), Armstrong BK(1), Anton-Culver H(1), Gruber SB(1), From L(1), Busam KJ(1),
Hao H(1), Orlow I(1), Kanetsky PA(1), Luo L(1), Reiner AS(1), Paine S(1), Frank
JS(1), Bramson JI(1), Marrett LD(1), Gallagher RP(1), Zanetti R(1), Rosso S(1),
Dwyer T(1), Cust AE(1), Ollila DW(1), Begg CB(1), Berwick M(1), Conway K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology (Dr. Thomas and Ms. Hao), Epidemiology (Dr.
Conway), Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (Dr. Groben), and Surgery (Dr. Ollila,
Ms. Frank, Ms. Bramson), Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center (Drs. Thomas,
Ollila, and Conway and Ms. Edmiston, Ms. Alexander, and Ms. Parrish), University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Sydney School of Public Health
(Drs. Armstrong, Kricker, and Cust), The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia; Women's College Hospital (Dr. From), Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Departments of Pathology (Dr. Busam) and Epidemiology and Biostatistics (Drs.
Orlow and Begg and Ms. Reiner), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York; University of California (Dr. Anton-Culver), Irvine, California; USC
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center (Dr. Gruber), University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL (Dr. Kanetsky); Cancer Care
Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Dr. Marrett); British Columbia Cancer Agency, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada(Dr. Gallagher); Piedmont Cancer Registry,
Centre for Epidemiology and Prevention in Oncology in Piedmont, Turin, Italy
(Drs. Rosso and Zanetti); The George Institute for Global Health, Oxford Martin
School, & Nuffield Department of Population Health, Oxford University, United
Kingdom (Dr. Dwyer); Department of Medicine, Division of Epidemiology (Ms. Paine 
and Drs. Luo and Berwick) University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

IMPORTANCE: NRAS and BRAF mutations in melanoma inform current treatment
paradigms but their role in survival from primary melanoma has not been
established. Identification of patients at high risk of melanoma-related death
based on their primary melanoma characteristics before evidence of recurrence
could inform recommendations for patient follow-up and eligibility for adjuvant
trials.
OBJECTIVE: To determine tumor characteristics and survival from primary melanoma 
by somatic NRAS and BRAF status.
DESIGN SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A population-based study with median follow-up
of 7.6 years for 912 patients with first primary cutaneous melanoma analyzed for 
NRAS and BRAF mutations diagnosed in the year 2000 from the United States and
Australia in the Genes, Environment and Melanoma Study and followed through 2007.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Tumor characteristics and melanoma-specific survival 
of primary melanoma by NRAS and BRAF mutational status.
RESULTS: The melanomas were 13% NRAS+, 30% BRAF+, and 57% with neither NRAS nor
BRAF mutation (wildtype). In a multivariable model including clinicopathologic
characteristics, NRAS+ melanoma was associated (P<.05) with mitoses, lower tumor 
infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) grade, and anatomic site other than scalp/neck and 
BRAF+ melanoma was associated with younger age, superficial spreading subtype,
and mitoses, relative to wildtype melanoma. There was no significant difference
in melanoma-specific survival for melanoma harboring mutations in NRAS (HR 1.7,
95% CI, 0.8-3.4) or BRAF (HR, 1.5, 95% CI, 0.8-2.9) compared to wildtype melanoma
adjusted for age, sex, site, AJCC tumor stage, TIL grade, and study center.
However, melanoma-specific survival was significantly poorer for higher risk (T2b
or higher stage) tumors with NRAS (HR 2.9; 95% CI 1.1-7.7) or BRAF (HR 3.1; 95%
CI 1.2-8.5) mutations but not for lower risk (T2a or lower) tumors (P=.65)
adjusted for age, sex, site, AJCC tumor stage, TIL grade, and study center.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Lower TIL grade for NRAS+ melanoma suggests it has a
more immunosuppressed microenvironment, which may impact its response to
immunotherapies. Further, the approximately three-fold increased death rate for
higher risk tumors harboring NRAS or BRAF mutations compared to wildtype
melanomas after adjusting for other prognostic factors indicates that the
prognostic implication of NRAS and BRAF mutations deserves further investigation,
particularly in higher AJCC stage primary melanomas.

PMCID: PMC4486299 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26146664  [PubMed]


19. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul 2. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3071. [Epub ahead of print]

Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 are the major determinants of the apoptotic response to dual
PI3K and MEK blockage.

Jokinen E(1), Koivunen JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiotherapy and Medical Research Center
Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, PB22 90029 OYS,
Finland.

The dual targeting of PI3K-AKT-mTOR and Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathways is a potential
anticancer therapy, but unfortunately, the response rate has been low in early
phase clinical trials. Pre-clinical models have suggested that an apoptotic
response to dual PI3K and MEK targeting is relatively rare and understanding
apoptotic avoidance could lead to increased clinical efficiency. This study
investigated solid cancer cell lines, which are known to be sensitive to dual
PI3K and MEK inhibition but to have a limited apoptotic response. The cells were 
exposed to dual PI3K and MEK blockage in combination with a panel of additional
pharmacological agents and cytotoxicity and apoptosis were analyzed. Our results 
indicated that the BH3 mimetic ABT-263, the HDAC inhibitor entinostat and the
multikinase inhibitor dasatinib increased the cytotoxicity and apoptotic response
of dual PI3K and MEK targeting. Furthermore, ABT-263 and entinostat was able to
induce apoptosis in combination with single agent PI3K and MEK inhibitors.
Protein expression, immunoprecipitation and siRNA knockdown models suggested that
Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 were the most important factors circumventing PI3K and/or MEK
inhibition-mediated apoptosis. The results suggest that the cytotoxicity of PI3K 
and/or MEK inhibitor treatments can be augmented by combinatory approaches
targeting anti-apoptotic mediators Bcl-xl and Mcl-1.

PMID: 26135106  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Apr 15;8(4):5553-8. eCollection 2015.

The role of leptin in the ventricular remodeling process and its mechanism.

Zuo G(1), Du X(1), Zheng L(1), Wang C(1), Wang K(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Fifth Central Hospital No. 41 Zhejiang Road,
Tianjin 300450, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the role of leptin in the ventricular
remodeling process and its mechanism in the diabetic rats' model.
METHODS: The diabetic SD rats model induced by streptozotocin was established.
The SD rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: control group (20 rats treated
with citric acid/sodium citrate buffer); M0 group (10 rats treated with
physiological saline); M1 group (10 rats treated with 50 Î¼g/kg LP); M2 group (10 
rats treated with 100 Î¼g/kg LP). Ang-II was detected by ELISA. The expression
levels of LP and Ob-Rb were detected by RT-PCR. MAPK phosphorylation changes were
detected by western blotting. Myocardial morphology was observed.
RESULTS: Compared with control group, the blood glucose concentration and Ang-II 
significantly increased in diabetic model groups (P < 0.01) and body weight
decreased (P < 0.05). The expression levels of LP and Ob-Rb increased and heart
function decreased in diabetic model groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LP may be involved in the myocardial cell hypertrophy through the
neuroendocrine system and associated with the JAK-STAT, Ras-Raf-MEK-MAPK and
PI-3K signaling pathway, which provides a new concept for the pathogenesis of
cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC4483875
PMID: 26131137  [PubMed]

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Jun 24;6:7354. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8354.

Grb2 monomer-dimer equilibrium determines normal versus oncogenic function.

Ahmed Z(1), Timsah Z(2), Suen KM(2), Cook NP(3), Lee GR 4th(4), Lin CC(2), Gagea 
M(5), Marti AA(3), Ladbury JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA [2] Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function, University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas,
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas
77030, USA [2] School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK. (3)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas
77005, USA. (4)Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function, University of
Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. (5)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of
Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 63, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (6)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for Biomolecular Structure and
Function, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

The adaptor protein growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) is ubiquitously
expressed in eukaryotic cells and involved in a multitude of intracellular
protein interactions. Grb2 plays a pivotal role in tyrosine kinase-mediated
signal transduction including linking receptor tyrosine kinases to the
Ras/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, which is implicated in
oncogenic outcome. Grb2 exists in a constitutive equilibrium between monomeric
and dimeric states. Here we show that only monomeric Grb2 is capable of binding
to SOS and upregulating MAP kinase signalling and that the dimeric state is
inhibitory to this process. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 160 (Y160) on Grb2, or
binding of a tyrosylphosphate-containing ligand to the SH2 domain of Grb2,
results in dimer dissociation. Phosphorylation of Y160 on Grb2 is readily
detectable in the malignant forms of human prostate, colon and breast cancers.
The self-association/dissociation of Grb2 represents a switch that regulates MAP 
kinase activity and hence controls cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4491180
PMID: 26103942  [PubMed - in process]


2. Eur Heart J. 2015 Jun 11. pii: ehv268. [Epub ahead of print]

Association between renin-angiotensin system antagonist use and mortality in
heart failure with severe renal insufficiency: a prospective propensity
score-matched cohort study.

Edner M(1), Benson L(2), DahlstrÃ¶m U(3), Lund LH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Unit of Cardiology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of Clinical Science and Education, SÃ¶S,
Karolinska Institutet, 11883 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Department of Cardiology UHL, LinkÃ¶ping University, County Council of
ÃstergÃ¶tland, 58191 LinkÃ¶ping, Sweden. (4)Department of Medicine, Unit of
Cardiology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden Department of
Cardiology, N3:06, Karolinska University Hospital, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden
lars.lund@alumni.duke.edu.

AIMS: In heart failure (HF) with reduced ejection fraction (EF),
renin-angiotensin receptor (RAS) antagonists reduce mortality. However, severe
renal insufficiency was an exclusion criterion in trials. We tested the
hypothesis that RAS antagonists are associated with reduced mortality also in HF 
with severe renal insufficiency.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied patients with EF â¤39% registered in the
prospective Swedish Heart Failure Registry. In patients with creatinine >221
Âµmol/L or creatinine clearance <30 mL/min, propensity scores for RAS-antagonist
use were derived from 36 variables. The association between RAS antagonist use
and all-cause mortality was assessed with Cox regression in a cohort matched 1:1 
based on age and propensity score. To assess consistency, we performed the same
analysis as a 'positive control' in patients without severe renal insufficiency. 
Between 2000 and 2013, there were 24 283 patients of which 2410 [age, mean (SD), 
82 (9), 45% women] had creatinine >221 Âµmol/L or creatinine clearance <30 mL/min 
and were treated (n = 1602) or not treated (n = 808) with RAS antagonists. In the
matched cohort of 602 vs. 602 patients [age 83 (8), 42% women], RAS antagonist
use was associated with 55% [95% confidence interval (CI) 51-59] vs. 45% (41-49) 
1-year survival, P < 0.001, with a hazard ratio (HR) for mortality of 0.76 (95%
CI 0.67-0.86, P < 0.001). In positive control patients without severe renal
insufficiency [n = 21 873; age 71 (12), 27% women], the matched HR was 0.79 (95% 
CI 0.72-0.86, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In HF with severe renal insufficiency, the use of RAS antagonists was
associated with lower all-cause mortality. Prospective randomized trials are
needed before these findings can be applied to clinical practice.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. Â©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26069212  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Eur J Immunol. 2015 May 14. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445226. [Epub ahead of print]

Absence of both Sos-1 and Sos-2 in peripheral CD4(+) T cells leads to PI3K
pathway activation and defects in migration.

Guittard G(1), Kortum RL(1), Balagopalan L(1), Ãuburu N(2), Nguyen P(1), Sommers 
CL(1), Samelson LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Sos-1 and Sos-2 are ubiquitously expressed Ras-guanine exchange factors involved 
in Erk-MAP kinase pathway activation. Using mice lacking genes encoding Sos-1 and
Sos-2, we evaluated the role of these proteins in peripheral T-cell signaling and
function. Our results confirmed that TCR-mediated Erk activation in peripheral
CD4(+) T cells does not depend on Sos-1 and Sos-2, although IL-2-mediated Erk
activation does. Unexpectedly, however, we show an increase in AKT
phosphorylation in Sos-1/2dKO CD4(+) T cells upon TCR and IL-2 stimulation.
Activation of AKT was likely a consequence of increased recruitment of PI3K to
Grb2 upon TCR and/or IL-2 stimulation in Sos-1/2dKO CD4(+) T cells. The increased
activity of the PI3K/AKT pathway led to downregulation of the surface receptor
CD62L in Sos-1/2dKO T cells and a subsequent impairment in T-cell migration.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 25973715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Immunol. 2015 Apr 15;194(8):3852-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401996. Epub 2015
Mar 18.

Inhibition of CD40-induced N-Ras activation reduces leishmania major infection.

Chakraborty S(1), Srivastava A(1), Jha MK(1), Nair A(1), Pandey SP(1), Srivastava
N(1), Kumari S(1), Singh S(1), Krishnasastry MV(1), Saha B(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India. (2)National
Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India sahab@nccs.res.in.

Leishmania major is a parasite that resides and replicates in macrophages. We
previously showed that the parasite enhanced CD40-induced Raf-MEK-ERK signaling
but inhibited PI3K-MKK-p38MAPK signaling to proleishmanial effects. As Raf and
PI3K have a Ras-binding domain but exert opposite effects on Leishmania
infection, we examined whether Ras isoforms had differential roles in Leishmania 
infection. We observed that L. major enhanced N-Ras and H-Ras expression but
inhibited K-Ras expression in macrophages. L. major infection enhanced N-Ras
activity but inhibited H-Ras and K-Ras activity. TLR2 short hairpin RNA or
anti-TLR2 or anti-lipophosphoglycan Abs reversed the L. major-altered N-Ras and
K-Ras expressions. Pam3CSK4, a TLR2 ligand, enhanced N-Ras expression but reduced
K-Ras expression, indicating TLR2-regulated Ras expression in L. major infection.
Whereas N-Ras silencing reduced L. major infection, K-Ras and H-Ras silencing
enhanced the infection both in macrophages in vitro and in C57BL/6 mice.
BALB/c-derived macrophages transduced with lentivirally expressed N-Ras short
hairpin RNA and pulsed with L. major-expressed MAPK10 enhanced MAPK10-specific
Th1-type response. CD40-deficient mice primed with these macrophages had reduced 
L. major infection, accompanied by higher IFN-Î³ but less IL-4 production. As
N-Ras is activated by Sos, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, we modeled the
N-Ras-Sos interaction and designed two peptides from their interface. Both the
cell-permeable peptides reduced L. major infection in BALB/c mice but not in
CD40-deficient mice. These data reveal the L. major-enhanced CD40-induced N-Ras
activation as a novel immune evasion strategy and the potential for Ras
isoform-targeted antileishmanial immunotherapy and immunoprophylaxis.

Copyright Â© 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25786685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 1;396(8):831-48. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2014-0257.

Ras activation revisited: role of GEF and GAP systems.

Hennig A, Markwart R, Esparza-Franco MA, Ladds G, Rubio I.

Ras is a prototypical small G-protein and a central regulator of growth,
proliferation and differentiation processes in virtually every nucleated cell. As
such, Ras becomes engaged and activated by multiple growth factors, mitogens,
cytokines or adhesion receptors. Ras activation comes about by changes in the
steady-state equilibrium between the inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound
and active guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound states of Ras, resulting in the
mostly transient accumulation of Ras-GTP. Three decades of intense Ras research
have disclosed various families of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and
GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) as the two principal regulatory elements of the
Ras-GDP/GTP loading status. However, with the possible exception of the GEF Sos, 
we still have only a rudimentary knowledge of the precise role played by many GEF
and GAP members in the signalling network upstream of Ras. As for GAPs, we even
lack the fundamental understanding of whether they function as genuine signal
transducers in the context of growth factor-elicited Ras activation or rather act
as passive modulators of the Ras-GDP/GTP cycle. Here we sift through the large
body of Ras literature and review the relevant data for understanding the
participation and precise role played by GEFs and GAPs in the process of Ras
activation.

PMID: 25781681  [PubMed - in process]


6. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):909-14. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2111. Epub 2015 Feb 
26.

The proliferative effects of Pyropia yezoensis peptide on IEC-6 cells are
mediated through the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway.

Lee MK(1), Kim IH(2), Choi YH(2), Choi JW(1), Kim YM(2), Nam TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Pukyong National University, Busan
608-737, Republic of Korea. (2)Institute of Fisheries Science, Pukyong National
University, Busan 619-911, Republic of Korea.

For a number of years, seaweed has been used as a functional food in Asian
countries, particularly in Korea, Japan and China. Pyropia yezoensis is a marine 
red alga that has potentially beneficial biological activities. In this study, we
examined the mechanisms through which a Pyropia yezoensis peptide [PYP1 (1-20)]
induces the proliferation of IEC-6 cells, a rat intestinal epithelial cell line, 
and the involvement of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
pathway. First, cell viability assay revealed that PYP1 (1-20) induced cell
proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner. Subsequently, we examined the 
mechanisms responsible for this induction of proliferation induced by PYP1
(1-20). EGFR is widely expressed in mammalian epithelial tissues, and the binding
of this ligand affects a variety of cell physiological parameters, such as cell
growth and proliferation. PYP1 (1-20) increased the expression of EGFR, Shc,
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) and son of sevenless (SOS). EGFR
also induced the activation of the Ras signaling pathway through Raf, MEK and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation. In addition, cell
cycle analysis revealed the expression of cell cycle-related proteins. The
results demonstrated an increased number of cells in the G1 phase and an enhanced
cell proliferation. In addition, the upregulation of cyclin D, cyclin E, Cdk2,
Cdk4 and Cdk6 was observed accompanied by a decreased in p21 and p27 expression. 
These findings suggest that PYP1 (1-20) stimulates the proliferation of rat IEC-6
cells by activating the EGFR signaling pathway. Therefore, PYP1 (1-20) may be a
potential source for the development of bio-functional foods which promotes the
proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4356455
PMID: 25716690  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 12;58(5):2265-74. doi: 10.1021/jm501660t. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Small molecule binding sites on the Ras:SOS complex can be exploited for
inhibition of Ras activation.

Winter JJ(1), Anderson M, Blades K, Brassington C, Breeze AL, Chresta C, Embrey
K, Fairley G, Faulder P, Finlay MR, Kettle JG, Nowak T, Overman R, Patel SJ,
Perkins P, Spadola L, Tart J, Tucker JA, Wrigley G.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca , Alderley Park, Macclesfield, Cheshire, SK10 4TG, United Kingdom.

Constitutively active mutant KRas displays a reduced rate of GTP hydrolysis via
both intrinsic and GTPase-activating protein-catalyzed mechanisms, resulting in
the perpetual activation of Ras pathways. We describe a fragment screening
campaign using X-ray crystallography that led to the discovery of three fragment 
binding sites on the Ras:SOS complex. The identification of tool compounds
binding at each of these sites allowed exploration of two new approaches to Ras
pathway inhibition by stabilizing or covalently modifying the Ras:SOS complex to 
prevent the reloading of Ras with GTP. Initially, we identified ligands that
bound reversibly to the Ras:SOS complex in two distinct sites, but these
compounds were not sufficiently potent inhibitors to validate our stabilization
hypothesis. We conclude by demonstrating that covalent modification of Cys118 on 
Ras leads to a novel mechanism of inhibition of the SOS-mediated interaction
between Ras and Raf and is effective at inhibiting the exchange of labeled GDP in
both mutant (G12C and G12V) and wild type Ras.

PMID: 25695162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4279-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.112045.

A non-cell-autonomous role for Ras signaling in C. elegans neuroblast
delamination.

Parry JM(1), Sundaram MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA Department of Biology,
Georgian Court University, 900 Lakewood Avenue, Lakewood, NJ 08701, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
sundaram@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling through Ras influences many aspects of
normal cell behavior, including epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
aberrant signaling promotes both tumorigenesis and metastasis. Although many such
effects are cell-autonomous, here we show a non-cell-autonomous role for RTK-Ras 
signaling in the delamination of a neuroblast from an epithelial organ. The C.
elegans renal-like excretory organ is initially composed of three unicellular
epithelial tubes, namely the canal, duct and G1 pore cells; however, the G1 cell 
later delaminates from the excretory system to become a neuroblast and is
replaced by the G2 cell. G1 delamination and G2 intercalation involve
cytoskeletal remodeling, interconversion of autocellular and intercellular
junctions and migration over a luminal extracellular matrix, followed by G1
junction loss. LET-23/EGFR and SOS-1, an exchange factor for Ras, are required
for G1 junction loss but not for initial cytoskeletal or junction remodeling.
Surprisingly, expression of activated LET-60/Ras in the neighboring duct cell,
but not in the G1 or G2 cells, is sufficient to rescue sos-1 delamination
defects, revealing that Ras acts non-cell-autonomously to permit G1 delamination.
We suggest that, similarly, oncogenic mutations in cells within a tumor might
help create a microenvironment that is permissive for other cells to detach and
ultimately metastasize.

Â© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302911 [Available on 2015-11-15]
PMID: 25371363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Adv Bioinformatics. 2014;2014:431696. doi: 10.1155/2014/431696. Epub 2014 Sep 21.

In Silico Screening of Mutated K-Ras Inhibitors from Malaysian Typhonium
flagelliforme for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Fatima A(1), Yee HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
UCSI University, Jalan Menara Gading 1, Taman Connaught, Cheras, 56000 Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

K-ras is an oncogenic GTPase responsible for at least 15-25% of all non-small
cell lung cancer cases worldwide. Lung cancer of both types is increasing with an
alarming rate due to smoking habits in Malaysia among men and women. Natural
products always offer alternate treatment therapies that are safe and effective. 
Typhonium flagelliforme or Keladi Tikus is a local plant known to possess
anticancer properties. The whole extract is considered more potent than
individual constituents. Since K-ras is the key protein in lung cancer, our aim
was to identify the constituents of the plant that could target the mutated
K-ras. Using docking strategies, reported potentially active compounds of
Typhonium flagelliforme were docked into the allosteric surface pockets and
switch regions of the K-ras protein to identify possible inhibitors. The selected
ligands were found to have a high binding affinity for the switch II and the
interphase region of the ras-SOS binding surface.

PMCID: PMC4189522
PMID: 25309590  [PubMed]


10. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 15;74(20):5866-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0806. Epub 
2014 Aug 28.

Dsh homolog DVL3 mediates resistance to IGFIR inhibition by regulating IGF-RAS
signaling.

Gao S(1), Bajrami I(2), Verrill C(3), Kigozi A(2), Ouaret D(1), Aleksic T(1),
Asher R(3), Han C(1), Allen P(4), Bailey D(4), Feller S(1), Kashima T(1),
Athanasou N(5), Blay JY(6), Schmitz S(7), Machiels JP(7), Upile N(8), Jones
TM(8), Thalmann G(9), Ashraf SQ(1), Wilding JL(1), Bodmer WF(1), Middleton
MR(10), Ashworth A(2), Lord CJ(2), Macaulay VM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Cellular Pathology and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research 
Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (4)Department of Cellular Pathology, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. (5)Nuffield
Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, Department 
of Pathology, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom. (6)University 
Claude Bernard Lyon I, Centre LÃ©on BÃ©rard, Department of Medicine, Lyon, France. 
(7)Service d'oncologie mÃ©dicale, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UniversitÃ©
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (8)Liverpool CR-UK Centre, Department
of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital,
Liverpool, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Urology, Inselspital, Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (10)Oxford Cancer and Haematology Centre, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford Cancer
and Haematology Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
valentine.macaulay@oncology.ox.ac.uk.

Drugs that inhibit insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGFI) receptor IGFIR were
encouraging in early trials, but predictive biomarkers were lacking and the drugs
provided insufficient benefit in unselected patients. In this study, we used
genetic screening and downstream validation to identify the WNT pathway element
DVL3 as a mediator of resistance to IGFIR inhibition. Sensitivity to IGFIR
inhibition was enhanced specifically in vitro and in vivo by genetic or
pharmacologic blockade of DVL3. In breast and prostate cancer cells,
sensitization tracked with enhanced MEK-ERK activation and relied upon MEK
activity and DVL3 expression. Mechanistic investigations showed that DVL3 is
present in an adaptor complex that links IGFIR to RAS, which includes Shc, growth
factor receptor-bound-2 (Grb2), son-of-sevenless (SOS), and the tumor suppressor 
DAB2. Dual DVL and DAB2 blockade synergized in activating ERKs and sensitizing
cells to IGFIR inhibition, suggesting a nonredundant role for DVL3 in the
Shc-Grb2-SOS complex. Clinically, tumors that responded to IGFIR inhibition
contained relatively lower levels of DVL3 protein than resistant tumors, and DVL3
levels in tumors correlated inversely with progression-free survival in patients 
treated with IGFIR antibodies. Because IGFIR does not contain activating
mutations analogous to EGFR variants associated with response to EGFR inhibitors,
we suggest that IGF signaling achieves an equivalent integration at the
postreceptor level through adaptor protein complexes, influencing cellular
dependence on the IGF axis and identifying a patient population with potential to
benefit from IGFIR inhibition.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25168481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):1037-48. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

Oncogene mimicry as a mechanism of primary resistance to BRAF inhibitors.

Sos ML(1), Levin RS(2), Gordan JD(3), Oses-Prieto JA(4), Webber JT(5), Salt M(6),
Hann B(6), Burlingame AL(4), McCormick F(6), Bandyopadhyay S(5), Shokat KM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA; Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, CA 94158, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department of Medicine, 
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, CA
94158, USA. (5)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (6)Department of
Medicine, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (7)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address:
kevan.shokat@ucsf.edu.

Despite the development of potent RAF/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway inhibitors, only a fraction of BRAF-mutant patients benefit from
treatment with these drugs. Using a combined chemogenomics and chemoproteomics
approach, we identify drug-induced RAS-RAF-MEK complex formation in a subset of
BRAF-mutant cancer cells characterized by primary resistance to vemurafenib. In
these cells, autocrine interleukin-6 (IL-6) secretion may contribute to the
primary resistance phenotype via induction of JAK/STAT3 and MAPK signaling. In a 
subset of cell lines, combined IL-6/MAPK inhibition is able to overcome primary
resistance to BRAF-targeted therapy. Overall, we show that the signaling
plasticity exerted by primary resistant BRAF-mutant cells is achieved by their
ability to mimic signaling features of oncogenic RAS, a strategy that we term
"oncogene mimicry." This model may guide future strategies for overcoming primary
resistance observed in these tumors.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4294625
PMID: 25127139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 26;111(34):12544-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1403450111. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

DRK/DOS/SOS converge with Crk/Mbc/dCed-12 to activate Rac1 during glial
engulfment of axonal debris.

Lu TY(1), Doherty J(1), Freeman MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605. (2)Department of Neurobiology 
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605 marc.freeman@umassmed.edu.

Nervous system injury or disease leads to activation of glia, which govern
postinjury responses in the nervous system. Axonal injury in Drosophila results
in transcriptional up-regulation of the glial engulfment receptor Draper; there
is extension of glial membranes to the injury site (termed activation), and then 
axonal debris is internalized and degraded. Loss of the small GTPase Rac1 from
glia completely suppresses glial responses to injury, but upstream activators
remain poorly defined. Loss of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
Crk/myoblast city (Mbc)/dCed-12 has no effect on glial activation, but blocks
internalization and degradation of debris. Here we show that the signaling
molecules downstream of receptor kinase (DRK) and daughter of sevenless (DOS)
(mammalian homologs, Grb2 and Gab2, respectively) and the GEF son of sevenless
(SOS) (mammalian homolog, mSOS) are required for efficient activation of glia
after axotomy and internalization/degradation of axonal debris. At the earliest
steps of glial activation, DRK/DOS/SOS function in a partially redundant manner
with Crk/Mbc/dCed-12, with blockade of both complexes strongly suppressing all
glial responses, similar to loss of Rac1. This work identifies DRK/DOS/SOS as the
upstream Rac GEF complex required for glial responses to axonal injury, and
demonstrates a critical requirement for multiple GEFs in efficient glial
activation after injury and internalization/degradation of axonal debris.

PMCID: PMC4151738
PMID: 25099352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Science. 2014 Jul 4;345(6192):50-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1250373.

Molecular kinetics. Ras activation by SOS: allosteric regulation by altered
fluctuation dynamics.

Iversen L(1), Tu HL(1), Lin WC(1), Christensen SM(1), Abel SM(2), Iwig J(3), Wu
HJ(1), Gureasko J(3), Rhodes C(4), Petit RS(1), Hansen SD(1), Thill P(5), Yu
CH(6), Stamou D(7), Chakraborty AK(8), Kuriyan J(9), Groves JT(10).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (2)Department of Chemical
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (5)Department of Chemistry, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA. (6)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Chemistry and Nano-Science Center, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (8)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Department of Chemistry,
MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Department of Biological Engineering, MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, MIT,
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Department of Physics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA. Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. (9)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Physical Biosciences and Materials
Sciences Divisions, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA. (10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Mechanobiology Institute, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. Physical Biosciences and Materials Sciences
Divisions, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
Berkeley Education Alliance for Research in Singapore, 1 Create Way, CREATE tower
level 11, University Town, Singapore 138602. jtgroves@lbl.gov.

Activation of the small guanosine triphosphatase H-Ras by the exchange factor Son
of Sevenless (SOS) is an important hub for signal transduction. Multiple layers
of regulation, through protein and membrane interactions, govern activity of SOS.
We characterized the specific activity of individual SOS molecules catalyzing
nucleotide exchange in H-Ras. Single-molecule kinetic traces revealed that SOS
samples a broad distribution of turnover rates through stochastic fluctuations
between distinct, long-lived (more than 100 seconds), functional states. The
expected allosteric activation of SOS by Ras-guanosine triphosphate (GTP) was
conspicuously absent in the mean rate. However, fluctuations into highly active
states were modulated by Ras-GTP. This reveals a mechanism in which functional
output may be determined by the dynamical spectrum of rates sampled by a small
number of enzymes, rather than the ensemble average.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4255705
PMID: 24994643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 26;34(13):1729-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.110. Epub 2014 May
19.

The ShcA adaptor activates AKT signaling to potentiate breast tumor angiogenesis 
by stimulating VEGF mRNA translation in a 4E-BP-dependent manner.

Im YK(1), La Selva R(1), Gandin V(1), Ha JR(1), Sabourin V(1), Sonenberg N(2),
Pawson T(3), Topisirovic I(1), Ursini-Siegel J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Goodman Cancer Research Centre,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The ShcA adaptor protein is engaged by numerous receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) 
in breast cancer cells. Once activated, RTKs phosphorylate three key tyrosine
phosphorylation sites (Y239, Y240 and Y317) within ShcA that creates a docking
site for Grb2/SOS and Grb2/Gab-containing complexes to activate the MAPK and AKT 
signaling pathways, respectively. We previously demonstrated that a tyrosine to
phenylalanine substitution of the ShcA tyrosine phosphorylation sites
(Shc3F-Y239/240/313F) significantly impairs breast tumor growth and angiogenesis 
in transgenic mouse models, in part, through the regulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production. Despite this fact, the underlying
molecular mechanisms by which ShcA transduces pro-tumorigenic signals in breast
cancer cells remain poorly defined. In this study, we demonstrate that
ShcA-dependent activation of AKT, but not the RAS/MAPK pathway, induces VEGF
production by bolstering VEGF mRNA translation. Accordingly, ShcA drives breast
tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo in a 4E-BP-dependent manner. These findings
establish ShcA as a biological bridge that links AKT activation downstream of
RTKs to cap-dependent VEGF mRNA translation in order to promote mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 24837366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Front Biol (Beijing). 2013 Oct 1;8(5):508-532.

RasGRP Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors in cancer.

Ksionda O(1), Limnander A(1), Roose JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA.

RasGRP proteins are activators of Ras and other related small GTPases by the
virtue of functioning as guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). In
vertebrates, four RasGRP family members have been described. RasGRP-1 through -4 
share many structural domains but there are also subtle differences between each 
of the different family members. Whereas SOS RasGEFs are ubiquitously expressed, 
RasGRP proteins are expressed in distinct patterns, such as in different cells of
the hematopoietic system and in the brain. Most studies have concentrated on the 
role of RasGRP proteins in the development and function of immune cell types
because of the predominant RasGRP expression profiles in these cells and the
immune phenotypes of mice deficient for Rasgrp genes. However, more recent
studies demonstrate that RasGRPs also play an important role in tumorigenesis.
Examples are skin- and hematological-cancers but also solid malignancies such as 
melanoma or prostate cancer. These novel studies bring up many new and unanswered
questions related to the molecular mechanism of RasGRP-driven oncogenesis, such
as new receptor systems that RasGRP appears to respond to as well as regulatory
mechanism for RasGRP expression that appear to be perturbed in these cancers.
Here we will review some of the known aspects of RasGRP biology in lymphocytes
and will discuss the exciting new notion that RasGRP Ras exchange factors play a 
role in oncogenesis downstream of various growth factor receptors.

PMCID: PMC3987922
PMID: 24744772  [PubMed]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 4;111(9):3401-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1315798111.
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Approach for targeting Ras with small molecules that activate SOS-mediated
nucleotide exchange.

Burns MC(1), Sun Q, Daniels RN, Camper D, Kennedy JP, Phan J, Olejniczak ET, Lee 
T, Waterson AG, Rossanese OW, Fesik SW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, Pharmacology, and Chemistry, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232.

Aberrant activation of the small GTPase Ras by oncogenic mutation or
constitutively active upstream receptor tyrosine kinases results in the
deregulation of cellular signals governing growth and survival in â¼30% of all
human cancers. However, the discovery of potent inhibitors of Ras has been
difficult to achieve. Here, we report the identification of small molecules that 
bind to a unique pocket on the Ras:Son of Sevenless (SOS):Ras complex, increase
the rate of SOS-catalyzed nucleotide exchange in vitro, and modulate Ras
signaling pathways in cells. X-ray crystallography of Ras:SOS:Ras in complex with
these molecules reveals that the compounds bind in a hydrophobic pocket in the
CDC25 domain of SOS adjacent to the Switch II region of Ras. The
structure-activity relationships exhibited by these compounds can be rationalized
on the basis of multiple X-ray cocrystal structures. Mutational analyses
confirmed the functional relevance of this binding site and showed it to be
essential for compound activity. These molecules increase Ras-GTP levels and
disrupt MAPK and PI3K signaling in cells at low micromolar concentrations. These 
small molecules represent tools to study the acute activation of Ras and
highlight a pocket on SOS that may be exploited to modulate Ras signaling.

PMCID: PMC3948241
PMID: 24550516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Immunol. 2014 May;44(5):1535-40. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344046. Epub 2014 Feb 
20.

Sos1 regulates sustained TCR-mediated Erk activation.

Poltorak M(1), Meinert I, Stone JC, Schraven B, Simeoni L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Otto-von-Guericke University, 
Magdeburg, Germany.

The duration and/or the magnitude of Ras-Erk activation are known to be crucial
for cell-fate decisions. In T cells, sustained Erk activation correlates with
differentiation/proliferation, whereas transient Erk activation parallels with
unresponsiveness/apoptosis. The mechanism by which Son of sevenless (Sos)
proteins and Ras guanyl-releasing protein 1 (RasGRP1) contribute to dynamics of
Erk activation in mature T cells is not yet known. Here, we have assessed this
issue using stimuli inducing either transient or sustained TCR signaling and RNA 
interference mediated suppression of Sos1, Sos2, and RasGRP1 expression in
primary human T cells. We found that transient Erk activation depends on RasGRP1 
but not on Sos. Conversely, sustained Erk signaling and T-cell activation depend 
on both Sos1 and RasGRP1. In summary, our data show for the first time that the
two guanine nucleotide exchange factors expressed in T cells are differentially
involved in the regulation of the duration of Erk phosphorylation and T-cell
activation.

Â© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24497027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 22;34(4):474-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.564. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Casein kinase 1 regulates Sprouty2 in FGF-ERK signaling.

Yim DG(1), Ghosh S(2), Guy GR(3), Virshup DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore, Singapore [2] Signal Transduction Laboratory, Institute for Molecular 
and Cellular Biology, Biopolis, Singapore [3] Genome Institute of Singapore,
Biopolis, Singapore. (2)Center for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Signal Transduction Laboratory,
Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Biopolis, Singapore. (4)1] Program 
in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore [2] Department of Biochemistry, YYL School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Sprouty2 (SPRY2) is a potent negative regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase
signaling, and is implicated as a tumor suppressor. SPRY2 inhibits FGF-RAS-ERK
signaling by binding to growth factor receptor bound protein 2 (GRB2) during
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) activation, disrupting the GRB2-SOS (son
of sevenless) complex that transduces signals from FGFR to RAS. SPRY2 binding to 
GRB2 is modulated by phosphorylation but the key regulatory kinase(s) are not
known. Prior studies identified the frequent presence of CK1 phosphorylation
motifs on SPRY2. We therefore tested if CK1 has a role in SPRY2 phosphorylation
and function. Loss of CK1 binding and inhibition of CK1 activity by two
structurally distinct small molecules abrogated SPRY2 inhibition of FGF-ERK
signaling, leading to decreased SPRY2 interaction with GRB2. Moreover, CK1
activity and binding are necessary for SPRY2 inhibition of FGF-stimulated neurite
outgrowth in PC12 cells. Consistent with its proposed role as an inhibitor of FGF
signaling, we find that CSNK1E transcript abundance negatively correlates with
FGF1/FGF7 message in human gastric cancer samples. Modulation of CK1 activity may
be therapeutically useful in the treatment of FGF/SPRY2-related diseases.

PMID: 24469046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 17;110(51):20587-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222078110. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Regulation of Son of sevenless by the membrane-actin linker protein ezrin.

Geissler KJ(1), Jung MJ, Riecken LB, Sperka T, Cui Y, Schacke S, Merkel U,
Markwart R, Rubio I, Than ME, Breithaupt C, Peuker S, Seifert R, Kaupp UB,
Herrlich P, Morrison H.

Author information: 
(1)H.M. Laboratory, P.H. Laboratory, and M.E.T. Laboratory, Leibniz Institute for
Age Research - Fritz Lipmann Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany.

Receptor tyrosine kinases participate in several signaling pathways through small
G proteins such as Ras (rat sarcoma). An important component in the activation of
these G proteins is Son of sevenless (SOS), which catalyzes the nucleotide
exchange on Ras. For optimal activity, a second Ras molecule acts as an
allosteric activator by binding to a second Ras-binding site within SOS. This
allosteric Ras-binding site is blocked by autoinhibitory domains of SOS. We have 
reported recently that Ras activation also requires the actin-binding proteins
ezrin, radixin, and moesin. Here we report the mechanism by which ezrin modulates
SOS activity and thereby Ras activation. Active ezrin enhances Ras/MAPK signaling
and interacts with both SOS and Ras in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, in vitro
kinetic assays with recombinant proteins show that ezrin also is important for
the activity of SOS itself. Ezrin interacts with GDP-Ras and with the Dbl
homology (DH)/pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of SOS, bringing GDP-Ras to the
proximity of the allosteric site of SOS. These actions of ezrin are antagonized
by the neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor-suppressor protein merlin. We propose an
additional essential step in SOS/Ras control that is relevant for human cancer as
well as all physiological processes involving Ras.

PMCID: PMC3870676
PMID: 24297905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Med Chem. 2013 Dec 12;56(23):9664-72. doi: 10.1021/jm401291q. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Bisphenol A binds to Ras proteins and competes with guanine nucleotide exchange: 
implications for GTPase-selective antagonists.

SchÃ¶pel M(1), Jockers KF, DÃ¼ppe PM, Autzen J, Potheraveedu VN, Ince S, Yip KT,
Heumann R, Herrmann C, Scherkenbeck J, Stoll R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ruhr University of Bochum ,
UniversitÃ¤tsstraÃe 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

We show for the first time that bisphenol A (10) has the capacity to interact
directly with K-Ras and that Rheb weakly binds to bisphenol A (10) and
4,4'-biphenol derivatives. We have characterized these interactions at atomic
resolution suggesting that these compounds sterically interfere with the
Sos-mediated nucleotide exchange in H- and K-Ras. We show that 4,4'-biphenol (5) 
selectively inhibits Rheb signaling and induces cell death suggesting that this
compound might be a novel candidate for treatment of tuberous sclerosis-mediated 
tumor growth. Our results propose a new mode of action for bisphenol A (10) that 
advocates a reduced exposure to this compound in our environment. Our data may
lay the foundation for the future design of GTPase-selective antagonists with
higher affinity to benefit of the treatment of cancer because K-Ras inhibition is
regarded to be a promising strategy with a potential therapeutic window for
targeting Sos in Ras-driven tumors.

PMID: 24266771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nat Commun. 2015 Jun 24;6:7354. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8354.

Grb2 monomer-dimer equilibrium determines normal versus oncogenic function.

Ahmed Z(1), Timsah Z(2), Suen KM(2), Cook NP(3), Lee GR 4th(4), Lin CC(2), Gagea 
M(5), Marti AA(3), Ladbury JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA [2] Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function, University of Texas, M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas,
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas
77030, USA [2] School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK. (3)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas
77005, USA. (4)Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function, University of
Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. (5)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of
Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 63, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (6)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for Biomolecular Structure and
Function, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 1000, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

The adaptor protein growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) is ubiquitously
expressed in eukaryotic cells and involved in a multitude of intracellular
protein interactions. Grb2 plays a pivotal role in tyrosine kinase-mediated
signal transduction including linking receptor tyrosine kinases to the
Ras/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, which is implicated in
oncogenic outcome. Grb2 exists in a constitutive equilibrium between monomeric
and dimeric states. Here we show that only monomeric Grb2 is capable of binding
to SOS and upregulating MAP kinase signalling and that the dimeric state is
inhibitory to this process. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 160 (Y160) on Grb2, or
binding of a tyrosylphosphate-containing ligand to the SH2 domain of Grb2,
results in dimer dissociation. Phosphorylation of Y160 on Grb2 is readily
detectable in the malignant forms of human prostate, colon and breast cancers.
The self-association/dissociation of Grb2 represents a switch that regulates MAP 
kinase activity and hence controls cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4491180
PMID: 26103942  [PubMed - in process]


2. Eur J Immunol. 2015 May 14. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445226. [Epub ahead of print]

Absence of both Sos-1 and Sos-2 in peripheral CD4(+) T cells leads to PI3K
pathway activation and defects in migration.

Guittard G(1), Kortum RL(1), Balagopalan L(1), Ãuburu N(2), Nguyen P(1), Sommers 
CL(1), Samelson LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Sos-1 and Sos-2 are ubiquitously expressed Ras-guanine exchange factors involved 
in Erk-MAP kinase pathway activation. Using mice lacking genes encoding Sos-1 and
Sos-2, we evaluated the role of these proteins in peripheral T-cell signaling and
function. Our results confirmed that TCR-mediated Erk activation in peripheral
CD4(+) T cells does not depend on Sos-1 and Sos-2, although IL-2-mediated Erk
activation does. Unexpectedly, however, we show an increase in AKT
phosphorylation in Sos-1/2dKO CD4(+) T cells upon TCR and IL-2 stimulation.
Activation of AKT was likely a consequence of increased recruitment of PI3K to
Grb2 upon TCR and/or IL-2 stimulation in Sos-1/2dKO CD4(+) T cells. The increased
activity of the PI3K/AKT pathway led to downregulation of the surface receptor
CD62L in Sos-1/2dKO T cells and a subsequent impairment in T-cell migration.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 25973715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):909-14. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2111. Epub 2015 Feb 
26.

The proliferative effects of Pyropia yezoensis peptide on IEC-6 cells are
mediated through the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway.

Lee MK(1), Kim IH(2), Choi YH(2), Choi JW(1), Kim YM(2), Nam TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Pukyong National University, Busan
608-737, Republic of Korea. (2)Institute of Fisheries Science, Pukyong National
University, Busan 619-911, Republic of Korea.

For a number of years, seaweed has been used as a functional food in Asian
countries, particularly in Korea, Japan and China. Pyropia yezoensis is a marine 
red alga that has potentially beneficial biological activities. In this study, we
examined the mechanisms through which a Pyropia yezoensis peptide [PYP1 (1-20)]
induces the proliferation of IEC-6 cells, a rat intestinal epithelial cell line, 
and the involvement of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
pathway. First, cell viability assay revealed that PYP1 (1-20) induced cell
proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner. Subsequently, we examined the 
mechanisms responsible for this induction of proliferation induced by PYP1
(1-20). EGFR is widely expressed in mammalian epithelial tissues, and the binding
of this ligand affects a variety of cell physiological parameters, such as cell
growth and proliferation. PYP1 (1-20) increased the expression of EGFR, Shc,
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) and son of sevenless (SOS). EGFR
also induced the activation of the Ras signaling pathway through Raf, MEK and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation. In addition, cell
cycle analysis revealed the expression of cell cycle-related proteins. The
results demonstrated an increased number of cells in the G1 phase and an enhanced
cell proliferation. In addition, the upregulation of cyclin D, cyclin E, Cdk2,
Cdk4 and Cdk6 was observed accompanied by a decreased in p21 and p27 expression. 
These findings suggest that PYP1 (1-20) stimulates the proliferation of rat IEC-6
cells by activating the EGFR signaling pathway. Therefore, PYP1 (1-20) may be a
potential source for the development of bio-functional foods which promotes the
proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4356455
PMID: 25716690  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 15;74(20):5866-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0806. Epub 
2014 Aug 28.

Dsh homolog DVL3 mediates resistance to IGFIR inhibition by regulating IGF-RAS
signaling.

Gao S(1), Bajrami I(2), Verrill C(3), Kigozi A(2), Ouaret D(1), Aleksic T(1),
Asher R(3), Han C(1), Allen P(4), Bailey D(4), Feller S(1), Kashima T(1),
Athanasou N(5), Blay JY(6), Schmitz S(7), Machiels JP(7), Upile N(8), Jones
TM(8), Thalmann G(9), Ashraf SQ(1), Wilding JL(1), Bodmer WF(1), Middleton
MR(10), Ashworth A(2), Lord CJ(2), Macaulay VM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Cellular Pathology and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research 
Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (4)Department of Cellular Pathology, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. (5)Nuffield
Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, Department 
of Pathology, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom. (6)University 
Claude Bernard Lyon I, Centre LÃ©on BÃ©rard, Department of Medicine, Lyon, France. 
(7)Service d'oncologie mÃ©dicale, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UniversitÃ©
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (8)Liverpool CR-UK Centre, Department
of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital,
Liverpool, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Urology, Inselspital, Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (10)Oxford Cancer and Haematology Centre, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford Cancer
and Haematology Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
valentine.macaulay@oncology.ox.ac.uk.

Drugs that inhibit insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGFI) receptor IGFIR were
encouraging in early trials, but predictive biomarkers were lacking and the drugs
provided insufficient benefit in unselected patients. In this study, we used
genetic screening and downstream validation to identify the WNT pathway element
DVL3 as a mediator of resistance to IGFIR inhibition. Sensitivity to IGFIR
inhibition was enhanced specifically in vitro and in vivo by genetic or
pharmacologic blockade of DVL3. In breast and prostate cancer cells,
sensitization tracked with enhanced MEK-ERK activation and relied upon MEK
activity and DVL3 expression. Mechanistic investigations showed that DVL3 is
present in an adaptor complex that links IGFIR to RAS, which includes Shc, growth
factor receptor-bound-2 (Grb2), son-of-sevenless (SOS), and the tumor suppressor 
DAB2. Dual DVL and DAB2 blockade synergized in activating ERKs and sensitizing
cells to IGFIR inhibition, suggesting a nonredundant role for DVL3 in the
Shc-Grb2-SOS complex. Clinically, tumors that responded to IGFIR inhibition
contained relatively lower levels of DVL3 protein than resistant tumors, and DVL3
levels in tumors correlated inversely with progression-free survival in patients 
treated with IGFIR antibodies. Because IGFIR does not contain activating
mutations analogous to EGFR variants associated with response to EGFR inhibitors,
we suggest that IGF signaling achieves an equivalent integration at the
postreceptor level through adaptor protein complexes, influencing cellular
dependence on the IGF axis and identifying a patient population with potential to
benefit from IGFIR inhibition.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25168481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 26;111(34):12544-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1403450111. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

DRK/DOS/SOS converge with Crk/Mbc/dCed-12 to activate Rac1 during glial
engulfment of axonal debris.

Lu TY(1), Doherty J(1), Freeman MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605. (2)Department of Neurobiology 
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605 marc.freeman@umassmed.edu.

Nervous system injury or disease leads to activation of glia, which govern
postinjury responses in the nervous system. Axonal injury in Drosophila results
in transcriptional up-regulation of the glial engulfment receptor Draper; there
is extension of glial membranes to the injury site (termed activation), and then 
axonal debris is internalized and degraded. Loss of the small GTPase Rac1 from
glia completely suppresses glial responses to injury, but upstream activators
remain poorly defined. Loss of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
Crk/myoblast city (Mbc)/dCed-12 has no effect on glial activation, but blocks
internalization and degradation of debris. Here we show that the signaling
molecules downstream of receptor kinase (DRK) and daughter of sevenless (DOS)
(mammalian homologs, Grb2 and Gab2, respectively) and the GEF son of sevenless
(SOS) (mammalian homolog, mSOS) are required for efficient activation of glia
after axotomy and internalization/degradation of axonal debris. At the earliest
steps of glial activation, DRK/DOS/SOS function in a partially redundant manner
with Crk/Mbc/dCed-12, with blockade of both complexes strongly suppressing all
glial responses, similar to loss of Rac1. This work identifies DRK/DOS/SOS as the
upstream Rac GEF complex required for glial responses to axonal injury, and
demonstrates a critical requirement for multiple GEFs in efficient glial
activation after injury and internalization/degradation of axonal debris.

PMCID: PMC4151738
PMID: 25099352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 26;34(13):1729-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.110. Epub 2014 May
19.

The ShcA adaptor activates AKT signaling to potentiate breast tumor angiogenesis 
by stimulating VEGF mRNA translation in a 4E-BP-dependent manner.

Im YK(1), La Selva R(1), Gandin V(1), Ha JR(1), Sabourin V(1), Sonenberg N(2),
Pawson T(3), Topisirovic I(1), Ursini-Siegel J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Goodman Cancer Research Centre,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The ShcA adaptor protein is engaged by numerous receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) 
in breast cancer cells. Once activated, RTKs phosphorylate three key tyrosine
phosphorylation sites (Y239, Y240 and Y317) within ShcA that creates a docking
site for Grb2/SOS and Grb2/Gab-containing complexes to activate the MAPK and AKT 
signaling pathways, respectively. We previously demonstrated that a tyrosine to
phenylalanine substitution of the ShcA tyrosine phosphorylation sites
(Shc3F-Y239/240/313F) significantly impairs breast tumor growth and angiogenesis 
in transgenic mouse models, in part, through the regulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production. Despite this fact, the underlying
molecular mechanisms by which ShcA transduces pro-tumorigenic signals in breast
cancer cells remain poorly defined. In this study, we demonstrate that
ShcA-dependent activation of AKT, but not the RAS/MAPK pathway, induces VEGF
production by bolstering VEGF mRNA translation. Accordingly, ShcA drives breast
tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo in a 4E-BP-dependent manner. These findings
establish ShcA as a biological bridge that links AKT activation downstream of
RTKs to cap-dependent VEGF mRNA translation in order to promote mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 24837366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 22;34(4):474-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.564. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Casein kinase 1 regulates Sprouty2 in FGF-ERK signaling.

Yim DG(1), Ghosh S(2), Guy GR(3), Virshup DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore, Singapore [2] Signal Transduction Laboratory, Institute for Molecular 
and Cellular Biology, Biopolis, Singapore [3] Genome Institute of Singapore,
Biopolis, Singapore. (2)Center for Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Signal Transduction Laboratory,
Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Biopolis, Singapore. (4)1] Program 
in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore [2] Department of Biochemistry, YYL School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Sprouty2 (SPRY2) is a potent negative regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase
signaling, and is implicated as a tumor suppressor. SPRY2 inhibits FGF-RAS-ERK
signaling by binding to growth factor receptor bound protein 2 (GRB2) during
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) activation, disrupting the GRB2-SOS (son
of sevenless) complex that transduces signals from FGFR to RAS. SPRY2 binding to 
GRB2 is modulated by phosphorylation but the key regulatory kinase(s) are not
known. Prior studies identified the frequent presence of CK1 phosphorylation
motifs on SPRY2. We therefore tested if CK1 has a role in SPRY2 phosphorylation
and function. Loss of CK1 binding and inhibition of CK1 activity by two
structurally distinct small molecules abrogated SPRY2 inhibition of FGF-ERK
signaling, leading to decreased SPRY2 interaction with GRB2. Moreover, CK1
activity and binding are necessary for SPRY2 inhibition of FGF-stimulated neurite
outgrowth in PC12 cells. Consistent with its proposed role as an inhibitor of FGF
signaling, we find that CSNK1E transcript abundance negatively correlates with
FGF1/FGF7 message in human gastric cancer samples. Modulation of CK1 activity may
be therapeutically useful in the treatment of FGF/SPRY2-related diseases.

PMID: 24469046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;3:e92. doi: 10.1038/psp.2013.65.

A General Network Pharmacodynamic Model-Based Design Pipeline for Customized
Cancer Therapy Applied to the VEGFR Pathway.

Zhang XY(1), Birtwistle MR(1), Gallo JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.

A unified approach to optimize multidrug chemotherapy using a pharmacokinetic
(PK)/enhanced pharmacodynamic model was developed using the vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor (VEGFR) signaling system. The base VEGFR network model,
characterized by ligand-receptor interactions, enzyme recruitment (Grb2-Sos,
phospholipase C Î³ (PLCÎ³), and phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)), and downstream
mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt cascade activation, was linked to a
sunitinib (VEGFR inhibitor) PK model and underwent Sobol sensitivity analysis
that revealed potential sunitinib-enhancing mechanisms. Drugs targeting these
mechanisms (a VEGF inhibitor, a PI3K inhibitor, a PLCÎ³ inhibitor, and a
mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor) and sunitinib were input to
optimization-based control analyses to design multidrug regimens that maintained 
80% pERK and pAkt inhibition for 28 days while minimizing drug dose. The
resultant combination regimens contained both continuous and discontinuous
schedules, mostly at low doses, and were altered by oncogenic mutations. This
pipeline of computational analyses demonstrates how model-based methods can
capture the complexities of drug action, tailor cancer chemotherapy, and empower 
personalized medicine.

PMCID: PMC3910016
PMID: 24429593  [PubMed]


9. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 9;3:2913. doi: 10.1038/srep02913.

Conformational change of Sos-derived proline-rich peptide upon binding Grb2
N-terminal SH3 domain probed by NMR.

Ogura K(1), Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido
University, Kita 21 Nishi 11, Kita-ku, Sapporo 001-0021, Japan.

Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) is a small adapter protein composed
of a single SH2 domain flanked by two SH3 domains. The N-terminal SH3 (nSH3)
domain of Grb2 binds a proline-rich region present in the guanine nucleotide
releasing factor, son of sevenless (Sos). Using NMR relaxation dispersion and
chemical shift analysis methods, we investigated the conformational change of the
Sos-derived proline-rich peptide during the transition between the free and Grb2 
nSH3-bound states. The chemical shift analysis revealed that the peptide does not
present a fully random conformation but has a relatively rigid structure. The
relaxation dispersion analysis detected conformational exchange of several
residues of the peptide upon binding to Grb2 nSH3.

PMID: 24105423  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;31(6):905-13. doi: 10.1159/000350108. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Crosstalk between PI3 kinase/PDK1/Akt/Rac1 and Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathways
downstream PDGF receptor.

Niba ET(1), Nagaya H, Kanno T, Tsuchiya A, Gotoh A, Tabata C, Kuribayashi K,
Nakano T, Nishizaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Our earlier studies suggested crosstalk between IRS/PI3
kinase/PDK1/Akt/Rac1/ROCK and (Shc2/Grb2/SOS)/Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathways downstream
PDGF-Î²Î² receptor responsible for chemotaxis and proliferation of malignant
mesothelioma cells. The present study was conducted to obtain evidence for this.
METHODS: To assess activation of Akt, MEK, and ERK, Western blotting was carried 
out on MSTO-211H malignant mesothelioma cells using antibodies against
phospho-Thr308-Akt, phopho-Ser473-Akt, Akt, phospho-MEK, MEK, phopho-ERK1/2, and 
ERK1/2. To knock-down Akt, PI3 kinase, PDK1, and Rac1, siRNAs silencing
each-targeted gene were constructed and transfected into cells. To monitor Rac1
activity, FRET monitoring was carried out on living and fixed cells.
RESULTS: ERK was activated under the basal conditions in MSTO-211H cells, and the
activation was prevented by inhibitors for PI3 kinase, PDK1, Akt, and Rac1 or by 
knocking-down PI3 kinase, PDK1, Akt, and Rac1. Akt was also activated under the
basal conditions, and the activation was suppressed by a MEK inhibitor and an
ERK1/2 inhibitor. In the FRET analysis, Rac1 was activated under the basal
conditions, and the activation was inhibited by a MEK inhibitor and an ERK1/2
inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study show that ERK could be activated by 
PI3 kinase, PDK1, Akt, and Rac1 and that alternatively, Akt and Rac1 could be
activated by MEK and ERK in MSTO-211H cells.

Copyright Â© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23817184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Biomed Sci. 2012 Dec;8(4):219-32.

Multiple Sites of Type II Site Ligand (Luteolin and BMHPC) Regulation of Gene
Expression in PC-3 Cells.

Markaverich BM(1), Vijjeswarapu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Type II [(3)H]estradiol binding site ligands including luteolin (a naturally
occurring bioflavonoid) and synthetic compounds such as
2,6-bis((3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)methylene)cyclohexanone (BMHPC) inhibit normal
and malignant prostate cell (PC-3, LNCaP, DU-145) proliferation in vitro and in
vivo. Type II sites represent a binding domain on histone H4 possibly involved in
an epigenetic mechanism for controlling gene transcription. Treatment of PC-3
human prostate cancer cells with luteolin or BMHPC modulated the expression of a 
number of genes in the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway
(EGFRSP) and cell cycle pathway (CCP). Pronounced stimulation (400-2000% of
control) of c-FOS and p21 RNA expression was observed, suggesting that these were
primary sites of action. Both compounds also caused irreversible G2/M arrest
(p<0.001). siRNA's for c-FOS or p21 reduced the RNA expression of their
respective targets by 85-95%, with minimal effects on cell proliferation.
Furthermore, neither siRNA alone (single knockdown), or in combination (double
knockdown), blocked luteolin or BMHPC inhibition of PC-3 cell proliferation.
Thus, although c-FOS and p21 are known to modulate the expression of genes in the
ESGRSP (EGFR, SOS, GRB2, JNK1, MKK4, RasGAP) and CCP (CCNA2, CCNE2, CDC25A,
CDKN1A, CDKN1B, p27, PLK1) involved in the regulation of cell proliferation by
luteolin and BMHPC, the c-FOS and p21 siRNA knockdown studies reported here
suggest that c-FOS and p21 may be secondary bystanders in the overall response to
these ligands in the regulation of PC-3 cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3615297
PMID: 23675277  [PubMed]


12. Leuk Res. 2013 May;37(5):520-30. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.01.014. Epub 2013
Feb 12.

Aberrant activation of ROS1 represents a new molecular defect in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia.

Cilloni D(1), Carturan S, Bracco E, Campia V, Rosso V, Torti D, Calabrese C,
Gaidano V, Niparuck P, Favole A, Signorino E, Iacobucci I, Morano A, De Luca L,
Musto P, Frassoni F, Saglio G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical and
Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. daniela.cilloni@unito.it

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a clonal disorder sharing features of
myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. Although rare
chromosomal aberrations and point mutations are reported in CMML, the molecular
defects underlying CMML are largely unknown. ROS1 encodes a tyrosine kinase that 
is abnormally expressed and translocated in brain and lung cancers. In this study
we show that ROS1 is abnormally activated in the CD34+ compartment of
approximately 70% of CMML patients resulting in the activation of the Erk/Akt
pathways through the Grb2/SOS complex thus revealing a central oncogenic role for
ROS1 in CMML which might represent a molecular target.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23415111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jul;133(1):43-57. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28001. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Caveolin-1 is a novel regulator of K-RAS-dependent migration in colon
carcinogenesis.

Basu Roy UK(1), Henkhaus RS, Loupakis F, Cremolini C, Gerner EW, Ignatenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Biochemistry and
Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, USA.

Caveolin-1 is an essential component of membrane caveolae. It is an important
regulator of cellular processes such as signal transduction and endocytosis. We
report here, for the first time, that caveolin-1 is a target of the K-RAS
oncogene in colon carcinogenesis. Caveolin-1 is induced in colon cancer cells and
in human colon tumor samples, in response to K-RAS activating mutations. An
activated K-RAS oncogene transcriptionally induces caveolin-1 expression in human
colon cancer cells and this effect is not restricted to the type of activating
K-RAS mutation. Inhibition of the P-I3 Kinase-AKT pathway, but not the ERK MAPK
pathway, both important K-RAS effectors, leads to a decrease in caveolin-1
expression indicating that the AKT pathway is involved in caveolin-1 expression
in response to an activated K-RAS. Increased AKT signaling induces caveolin-1
expression by increasing the activity of the transcription factor, Sp1.
Interestingly; caveolin-1 depletion alters K-RAS-dependent signaling by
decreasing Grb2-SOS activity. Consistent with these finding, caveolin-1-depleted 
cells shows decreased migration in vitro. However, caveolin-1 overexpression by
itself does not increase migration whereas an activated Src can increase
migration in a caveolin-1-dependent manner. This increased migration is highly
dependent on the RhoA GTPase, indicating that an activated K-RAS modulates
migration in part via caveolin-1 induction, and increasing RhoA activity via
phospho-caveolin-1. Our findings indicate that K-RAS regulates both caveolin-1
expression and other factors affecting caveolin-1 functions in colon
cancer-derived cell migration.

Copyright Â© 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3633716
PMID: 23280667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1834(2):524-35. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.11.001.
Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Unusual binding of Grb2 protein to a bivalent polyproline-ligand immobilized on a
SPR sensor: intermolecular bivalent binding.

de Mol NJ(1), Kruijtzer JA, Moret EE, Broutin I, Liskamp RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Utrecht Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiteitsweg 99, 3484 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
N.J.deMol@uu.nl

The Grb2 adapter protein is involved in the activation of the Ras signaling
pathway. It recruits the Sos protein by binding of its two SH3 domains to Sos
polyproline sequences. We observed that the binding of Grb2 to a bivalent ligand,
containing two Sos-derived polyproline-sequences immobilized on a SPR sensor,
shows unusual kinetic behavior. SPR-kinetic analysis and supporting data from
other techniques show major contributions of an intermolecular bivalent binding
mode. Each of the two Grb2 SH3 domains binds to one polyproline-sequence of two
different ligand molecules, facilitating binding of a second Grb2 molecule to the
two remaining free polyproline binding sites. A molecular model based on the
X-ray structure of the Grb2 dimer shows that Grb2 is flexible enough to allow
this binding mode. The results fit with a role of Grb2 in protein aggregation,
achieving specificity by multivalent interactions, despite the relatively low
affinity of single SH3 interactions.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Vis Exp. 2012 Oct 30;(68). pii: 4382. doi: 10.3791/4382.

A high-content imaging workflow to study Grb2 signaling complexes by expression
cloning.

Freeman J(1), Kriston-Vizi J, Seed B, Ketteler R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC LMCB, University College London.

Signal transduction by growth factor receptors is essential for cells to maintain
proliferation and differentiation and requires tight control. Signal transduction
is initiated by binding of an external ligand to a transmembrane receptor and
activation of downstream signaling cascades. A key regulator of mitogenic
signaling is Grb2, a modular protein composed of an internal SH2 (Src Homology 2)
domain flanked by two SH3 domains that lacks enzymatic activity. Grb2 is
constitutively associated with the GTPase Son-Of-Sevenless (SOS) via its
N-terminal SH3 domain. The SH2 domain of Grb2 binds to growth factor receptors at
phosphorylated tyrosine residues thus coupling receptor activation to the
SOS-Ras-MAP kinase signaling cascade. In addition, other roles for Grb2 as a
positive or negative regulator of signaling and receptor endocytosis have been
described. The modular composition of Grb2 suggests that it can dock to a variety
of receptors and transduce signals along a multitude of different pathways(1-3). 
Described here is a simple microscopy assay that monitors recruitment of Grb2 to 
the plasma membrane. It is adapted from an assay that measures changes in
sub-cellular localization of green-fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged Grb2 in
response to a stimulus(4-6). Plasma membrane receptors that bind Grb2 such as
activated Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) recruit GFP-Grb2 to the plasma 
membrane upon cDNA expression and subsequently relocate to endosomal compartments
in the cell. In order to identify in vivo protein complexes of Grb2, this
technique can be used to perform a genome-wide high-content screen based on
changes in Grb2 sub-cellular localization. The preparation of cDNA expression
clones, transfection and image acquisition are described in detail below.
Compared to other genomic methods used to identify protein interaction partners, 
such as yeast-two-hybrid, this technique allows the visualization of protein
complexes in mammalian cells at the sub-cellular site of interaction by a simple 
microscopy-based assay. Hence both qualitative features, such as patterns of
localization can be assessed, as well as the quantitative strength of the
interaction.

PMCID: PMC3499067
PMID: 23150065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Pharmacol Sci. 2012;119(2):150-9. Epub 2012 May 26.

Activated O2(â¢â) and H2O2 mediated cell survival in SU11274-treated
non-small-cell lung cancer A549 cells via c-Met-PI3K-Akt and
c-Met-Grb2/SOS-Ras-p38 pathways.

Liu Y(1), Shi QF, Ye YC, Tashiro S, Onodera S, Ikejima T.

Author information: 
(1)China-Japan Research Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, PR China.

The pharmacological activity of SU11274 is primarily due to its inhibition of
hepotocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met) kinase overexpression. In this study,
we demonstrated that the pathway involved in SU11274-induced autophagy was
presumably through inhibition of c-Met and its down-stream pathways, including
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases â Akt (PI3KâAkt) and the growth factor receptor
bound protein-2 / son of sevenless â Ras â p38 MAPK (Grb2/SOSâRasâp38) pathway.
SU11274 time-dependently induced the generation of superoxide anion (O2(â¢â)) and 
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). There is a negative feedback loop between reactive
oxygen species (ROS) induction and SU11274. Then, we investigated the role of ROS
in protecting cells against SU11274-induced autophagic cell death in A549 cells. 
O2(â¢â) and H2O2 generation activated c-MetâPI3KâAkt and c-MetâGrb2/SOSâRasâp38
signaling pathways, which were suppressed by O2(â¢â) scavenger superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and H2O2 scavenger catalase. In conclusion, O2(â¢â) and H2O2
evoked cell resistance to SU11274 via activating c-MetâPI3KâAkt and
c-MetâGrb2/SOSâRasâp38 pathways in A549 cells. SU11274 also induced ROS
generation in Caenorhabditis elegans.

PMID: 22673163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. EMBO Rep. 2012 Apr;13(4):386-91. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.17.

TCR-mediated Erk activation does not depend on Sos and Grb2 in peripheral human T
cells.

Warnecke N(1), Poltorak M, Kowtharapu BS, Arndt B, Stone JC, Schraven B, Simeoni 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Otto-von-Guericke University, 
Leipziger Strasse 44, Magdeburg 39120, Germany.

Sos proteins are ubiquitously expressed activators of Ras. Lymphoid cells also
express RasGRP1, another Ras activator. Sos and RasGRP1 are thought to
cooperatively control full Ras activation upon T-cell receptor triggering. Using 
RNA interference, we evaluated whether this mechanism operates in primary human T
cells. We found that T-cell antigen receptor (TCR)-mediated Erk activation
requires RasGRP1, but not Grb2/Sos. Conversely, Grb2/Sosâbut not RasGRP1âare
required for IL2-mediated Erk activation. Thus, RasGRP1 and Grb2/Sos are
insulators of signals that lead to Ras activation induced by different stimuli,
rather than cooperating downstream of the TCR.

PMCID: PMC3321150
PMID: 22344067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Genet. 2011 Dec;90(3):435-42.

Eight paths of ERK1/2 signalling pathway regulating hepatocyte proliferation in
rat liver regeneration.

Li JW(1), Wang GP, Fan JY, Chang CF, Xu CS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, Henan
Province, People's Republic of China.

Although it is known that hormones, growth factors and integrin promote
hepatocyte proliferation in liver regeneration (LR) through ERK1/2 signalling
pathway, reports about regulating processes of its intracellular paths in
hepatocytes of LR are limited. This study aims at exploring which paths of ERK1/2
signalling pathway participate in the regulation of rat LR, especially in
hepatocyte proliferation, and how they do so. In all, 14 paths and 165 genes are 
known to be involved in ERK1/2 signalling pathway. Of them, 161 genes are
included in Rat Genome 230 2.0 Array. This array was used to detect expression
changes of genes related to ERK1/2 signalling pathway in isolated hepatocytes of 
rat LR, showing that 60 genes were related to hepatocytes of LR. In addition,
bioinformatics and systems biology methods were used to analyse the roles of 14
above paths in regenerating hepatocytes. We found that three paths,
RTKâSHCâGRB2/SOSâRASâRAF, IntegrinÎâFAKâRACâPAKâRAF and GÎÎ³âPI3KÎÎ³âRACâPAKâRAF,
promoted the G1 phase progression of hepatocytes by activating ERK1/2. A further 
four paths, GqâPLCÎâPKCâSRC/PYK2âGRB2/SOSâRASâRAF,
RTKâPLCÎ³âPKCâSRC/PYK2âGRB2/SOSâRASâRAF, IntegrinÎâFAK/SRCâGRB2/SOSâRASâRAF and
IntegrinÎâFAKâRACâPAKâRAF, advanced the cell progression of S phase and G(2)/M
checkpoint by activating ERK1/2, and so did PP1/2âMek1/2 by decreasing the
negative influence on ERK1/2. At the late phase of LR, GÎ±sâACâEPACâRap1âRaf
blocked hepatocyte proliferation by decreasing the activity of ERK1/2 and so did 
PP1/2âMek1/2. In summary, 60 genes and 8 paths of ERK1/2 signalling pathway
regulated hepatocyte proliferation in rat LR.

PMID: 22227930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27511. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027511. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Activation of Ras requires the ERM-dependent link of actin to the plasma
membrane.

Sperka T(1), Geissler KJ, Merkel U, Scholl I, Rubio I, Herrlich P, Morrison HL.

Author information: 
(1)Morrison Laboratory, Leibniz Institute for Age Research-Fritz Lipmann
Institute, Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) participate in a multitude of
signaling pathways, some of them via the small G-protein Ras. An important
component in the activation of Ras is Son of sevenless (SOS), which catalyzes the
nucleotide exchange on Ras.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We can now demonstrate that the activation of Ras requires,
in addition, the essential participation of ezrin, radixin and/or moesin (ERM), a
family of actin-binding proteins, and of actin. Disrupting either the interaction
of the ERM proteins with co-receptors, down-regulation of ERM proteins by siRNA, 
expression of dominant-negative mutants of the ERM proteins or disruption of
F-actin, abolishes growth factor-induced Ras activation. Ezrin/actin catalyzes
the formation of a multiprotein complex consisting of RTK, co-receptor, Grb2, SOS
and Ras. We also identify binding sites for both Ras and SOS on ezrin; mutations 
of these binding sites destroy the interactions and inhibit Ras activation.
Finally, we show that the formation of the ezrin-dependent complex is necessary
to enhance the catalytic activity of SOS and thereby Ras activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Taking these findings together, we propose that the ERM proteins are
novel scaffolds at the level of SOS activity control, which is relevant for both 
normal Ras function and dysfunction known to occur in several human cancers.

PMCID: PMC3221661
PMID: 22132106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Signal. 2011 Dec;23(12):1885-95. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.06.017. Epub
2011 Jun 29.

The exquisite regulation of PLD2 by a wealth of interacting proteins: S6K, Grb2, 
Sos, WASp and Rac2 (and a surprise discovery: PLD2 is a GEF).

Gomez-Cambronero J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University
School of Medicine, Dayton, OH 45435, USA. julian.cambronero@wright.edu

Phospholipase D (PLD) catalyzes the conversion of the membrane phospholipid
phosphatidylcholine to choline and phosphatidic acid (PA). PLD's mission in the
cell is two-fold: phospholipid turnover with maintenance of the structural
integrity of cellular/intracellular membranes and cell signaling through PA and
its metabolites. Precisely, through its product of the reaction, PA, PLD has been
implicated in a variety of physiological cellular functions, such as
intracellular protein trafficking, cytoskeletal dynamics, chemotaxis of
leukocytes and cell proliferation. The catalytic (HKD) and regulatory (PH and PX)
domains were studied in detail in the PLD1 isoform, but PLD2 was traditionally
studied in lesser detail and much less was known about its regulation. Our
laboratory has been focusing on the study of PLD2 regulation in mammalian cells. 
Over the past few years, we have reported, in regards to the catalytic action of 
PLD, that PA is a chemoattractant agent that binds to and signals inside the cell
through the ribosomal S6 kinases (S6K). Regarding the regulatory domains of PLD2,
we have reported the discovery of the PLD2 interaction with Grb2 via Y169 in the 
PX domain, and further association to Sos, which results in an increase of de
novo DNA synthesis and an interaction (also with Grb2) via the adjacent residue
Y179, leading to the regulation of cell ruffling, chemotaxis and phagocytosis of 
leukocytes. We also present the complex regulation by tyrosine phosphorylation by
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R), Janus Kinase 3 (JAK3) and Src and the
role of phosphatases. Recently, there is evidence supporting a new level of
regulation of PLD2 at the PH domain, by the discovery of CRIB domains and a
Rac2-PLD2 interaction that leads to a dual (positive and negative) effect on its 
enzymatic activity. Lastly, we review the surprising finding of PLD2 acting as a 
GEF. A phospholipase such as PLD that exists already in the cell membrane that
acts directly on Rac allows a quick response of the cell without intermediary
signaling molecules. This provides only the latest level of PLD2 regulation in a 
field that promises newer and exciting advances in the next few years.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3204931
PMID: 21740967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Autophagy. 2015 Jun 10:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Upregulation of ATG3 contributes to autophagy induced by the detachment of
intestinal epithelial cells from the extracellular matrix, but promotes
autophagy-independent apoptosis of the attached cells.

Yoo BH(1), Zagryazhskaya A, Li Y, Koomson A, Khan IA, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S,
Rosen K.

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Pediatrics & Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Dalhousie
University , Halifax , NS Canada.

Detachment of non-malignant intestinal epithelial cells from the extracellular
matrix (ECM) triggers their growth arrest and, ultimately, apoptosis. In
contrast, colorectal cancer cells can grow without attachment to the ECM. This
ability is critical for their malignant potential. We found previously that
detachment-induced growth arrest of non-malignant intestinal epithelial cells is 
driven by their detachment-triggered autophagy, and that RRAS, a major oncogene, 
promotes growth of detached cells by blocking such autophagy. In an effort to
identify the mechanisms of detachment-induced autophagy and growth arrest of
non-malignant cells we found here that detachment of these cells causes
upregulation of ATG3 and that ATG3 upregulation contributes to autophagy and
growth arrest of detached cells. We also observed that when ATG3 expression is
artificially increased in the attached cells, ATG3 promotes neither autophagy nor
growth arrest but triggers their apoptosis. ATG3 upregulation likely promotes
autophagy of the detached but not that of the attached cells because
detachment-dependent autophagy requires other detachment-induced events, such as 
the upregulation of ATG7. We further observed that those few adherent cells that 
do not die by apoptosis induced by ATG3 become resistant to apoptosis caused by
cell detachment, a property that is critical for the ability of normal epithelial
cells to become malignant. We conclude that cell-ECM adhesion can switch ATG3
functions: when upregulated in detached cells in the context of other
autophagy-promoting events, ATG3 contributes to autophagy. However, when
overexpressed in the adherent cells, in the circumstances not favoring autophagy,
ATG3 triggers apoptosis.

PMID: 26061804  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. BMC Cancer. 2015 May 28;15:436. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1415-6.

Compounds identified by virtual docking to a tetrameric EGFR extracellular domain
can modulate Grb2 internalization.

Ramirez UD(1), Nikonova AS(2), Liu H(3), Pecherskaya A(4), Lawrence SH(5),
Serebriiskii IG(6,)(7), Zhou Y(8), Robinson MK(9), Einarson MB(10), Golemis
EA(11), Jaffe EK(12).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave,
Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. Ursula.Ramirez@fccc.edu. (2)Molecular Therapeutics 
Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. 
Anna.Nikonova@fccc.edu. (3)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. hanqing@ujs.edu.cn.
(4)Translational Facility, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave,
Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. anna_pech@yahoo.com. (5)Molecular Therapeutics
Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. 
Sarah.Lawrence@fccc.edu. (6)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA.
Ilya.Serebriiskii@fccc.edu. (7)Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia.
Ilya.Serebriiskii@fccc.edu. (8)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Facility, Fox
Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA.
Yan.Zhou@fccc.edu. (9)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. Matthew.Robinson@fccc.edu.
(10)Translational Facility, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave,
Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA. Margret.Einarson@fccc.edu. (11)Molecular
Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA,
19111, USA. Erica.Golemis@fccc.edu. (12)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Ave, Philadelphia, PA, 19111, USA.
Eileen.Jaffe@fccc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression or mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) potently enhances the growth of many solid tumors. Tumor cells frequently 
display resistance to mechanistically-distinct EGFR-directed therapeutic agents, 
making it valuable to develop therapeutics that work by additional mechanisms.
Current EGFR-targeting therapeutics include antibodies targeting the
extracellular domains, and small molecules inhibiting the intracellular kinase
domain. Recent studies have identified a novel prone extracellular tetrameric
EGFR configuration, which we identify as a potential target for drug discovery.
METHODS: Our focus is on the prone EGFR tetramer, which contains a novel
protein-protein interface involving extracellular domain III. This EGFR tetramer 
is computationally targeted for stabilization by small molecule ligand binding.
This study performed virtual screening of a Life Chemicals, Inc. small molecule
library of 345,232 drug-like compounds against a molecular dynamics simulation of
protein-protein interfaces distinct to the novel tetramer. One hundred nine
chemically diverse candidate molecules were selected and evaluated using a
cell-based high-content imaging screen that directly assessed induced
internalization of the EGFR effector protein Grb2. Positive hits were further
evaluated for influence on phosphorylation of EGFR and its effector ERK1/2.
RESULTS: Fourteen hit compounds affected internalization of Grb2, an adaptor
responsive to EGFR activation. Most hits had limited effect on cell viability,
and minimally influenced EGFR and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Docked hit compound
poses generally include Arg270 or neighboring residues, which are also involved
in binding the effective therapeutic cetuximab, guiding further chemical
optimization.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the EGFR tetrameric configuration offers a
novel cancer drug target.

PMCID: PMC4451962
PMID: 26016476  [PubMed - in process]


3. Sci Signal. 2015 May 12;8(376):ra46. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005697.

EGFR-activated Src family kinases maintain GAB1-SHP2 complexes distal from EGFR.

Furcht CM(1), Buonato JM(1), Lazzara MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA. Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA. mlazzara@seas.upenn.edu.

Complexes of signaling proteins that are nucleated upon activation of receptor
tyrosine kinases are dynamic macromolecular assemblies held together by
interactions, such as the recognition of phosphotyrosines by Src homology 2 (SH2)
domains. We predicted that reversible binding and phosphatase activity enable
dynamic regulation of these protein complexes, which could affect signal
transduction. We explored how dynamics in the interactions among the epidermal
growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR), GRB2-associated binder protein 1 (GAB1), and
SH2 domain-containing phosphatase 2 (SHP2) affected EGFR signaling output,
specifically SHP2 binding to tyrosine-phosphorylated GAB1, which relieves the
autoinhibition of SHP2. Among the effects of activated SHP2 is increased
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity. We found that in H1666 lung
adenocarcinoma cells, EGFR-activated Src family kinases (SFKs) counteracted
repeated GAB1 dephosphorylation events and maintained the association of SHP2
with phosphorylated GAB1 at a cytosolic site distal from EGFR. A computational
model predicted that an experimentally verified delay in SFK inactivation after
EGFR inactivation, combined with an amplification of GAB1 phosphorylation in
cells with proteins in a specific range of concentrations, enabled GAB1
phosphorylation and GAB1-SHP2 complexes to persist longer than EGFR
phosphorylation persisted in response to EGF. This SFK-dependent mechanism was
specific to EGFR and did not occur in response to activation of the receptor
tyrosine kinase c-MET. Thus, our results quantitatively describe a regulatory
mechanism used by some receptor tyrosine kinases to remotely control the duration
of a signal by regulating the persistence of a signaling protein complex.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25969544  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0125793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125793.
eCollection 2015.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Biliary Epithelial Cell NRas Activation Requires
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR).

Trussoni CE(1), Tabibian JH(1), Splinter PL(1), O'Hara SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, and the Mayo Clinic Center for
Cell Signaling in Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 55905,
United States of America.

Cholangiocytes (biliary epithelial cells) actively participate in microbe-induced
proinflammatory responses in the liver and contribute to inflammatory and
infectious cholangiopathies. We previously demonstrated that cholangiocyte
TLR-dependent NRas activation contributes to proinflammatory/ proliferative
responses. We test the hypothesis that LPS-induced activation of NRas requires
the EGFR. SV40-transformed human cholangiocytes (H69 cells), or low passage
normal human cholangiocytes (NHC), were treated with LPS in the presence or
absence of EGFR or ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17 (TACE) inhibitors. Ras
activation assays, quantitative RT-PCR, and proliferation assays were performed
in cells cultured with or without inhibitors or an siRNA to Grb2.
Immunofluorescence for phospho-EGFR was performed on LPS-treated mouse samples
and specimens from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary 
cirrhosis, hepatitis C, and normal livers. LPS-treatment induced an association
between the TLR/MyD88 and EGFR/Grb2 signaling apparatus, NRas activation, and
EGFR phosphorylation. NRas activation was sensitive to EGFR and TACE inhibitors
and correlated with EGFR phosphorylation. The TACE inhibitor and Grb2 depletion
prevented LPS-induced IL6 expression (p<0.05) and proliferation (p<0.01).
Additionally, cholangiocytes from LPS-treated mouse livers and human primary
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) livers exhibited increased phospho-EGFR (p<0.01).
Moreover, LPS-induced mouse cholangiocyte proliferation was inhibited by
concurrent treatment with the EGFR inhibitor, Erlotinib. Our results suggest that
EGFR is essential for LPS-induced, TLR4/MyD88-mediated NRas activation and
induction of a robust proinflammatory cholangiocyte response. These findings have
implications not only for revealing the signaling potential of TLRs, but also
implicate EGFR as an integral component of cholangiocyte TLR-induced
proinflammatory processes.

PMCID: PMC4411066
PMID: 25915403  [PubMed - in process]


5. Biophys J. 2015 Apr 7;108(7):1819-29. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.02.030.

Use of mechanistic models to integrate and analyze multiple proteomic datasets.

Stites EC(1), Aziz M(2), Creamer MS(3), Von Hoff DD(2), Posner RG(4), Hlavacek
WS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Translational Research Division, Translational Genomics Research
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Electronic address:
estites@path.wustl.edu. (2)Clinical Translational Research Division,
Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona. (3)Clinical
Translational Research Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute,
Phoenix, Arizona; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology,
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. (4)Clinical Translational Research
Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona; Department
of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona.
Electronic address: rposner@tgen.org. (5)Clinical Translational Research
Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona;
Theoretical Biology and Biophysics Group, Theoretical Division, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico. Electronic address: wish@lanl.gov.

Proteins in cell signaling networks tend to interact promiscuously through
low-affinity interactions. Consequently, evaluating the physiological importance 
of mapped interactions can be difficult. Attempts to do so have tended to focus
on single, measurable physicochemical factors, such as affinity or abundance. For
example, interaction importance has been assessed on the basis of the relative
affinities of binding partners for a protein of interest, such as a receptor.
However, multiple factors can be expected to simultaneously influence the
recruitment of proteins to a receptor (and the potential of these proteins to
contribute to receptor signaling), including affinity, abundance, and
competition, which is a network property. Here, we demonstrate that measurements 
of protein copy numbers and binding affinities can be integrated within the
framework of a mechanistic, computational model that accounts for mass action and
competition. We use cell line-specific models to rank the relative importance of 
protein-protein interactions in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling network for 11 different cell lines. Each model accounts for
experimentally characterized interactions of six autophosphorylation sites in
EGFR with proteins containing a Src homology 2 and/or phosphotyrosine-binding
domain. We measure importance as the predicted maximal extent of recruitment of a
protein to EGFR following ligand-stimulated activation of EGFR signaling. We find
that interactions ranked highly by this metric include experimentally detected
interactions. Proteins with high importance rank in multiple cell lines include
proteins with recognized, well-characterized roles in EGFR signaling, such as
GRB2 and SHC1, as well as a protein with a less well-defined role, YES1. Our
results reveal potential cell line-specific differences in recruitment.

Copyright Â© 2015 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4390817 [Available on 2016-04-07]
PMID: 25863072  [PubMed - in process]


6. Biomed Opt Express. 2015 Jan 6;6(2):277-96. doi: 10.1364/BOE.6.000277.
eCollection 2015.

A high speed multifocal multiphoton fluorescence lifetime imaging microscope for 
live-cell FRET imaging.

Poland SP(1), KrstajiÄ N(2), Monypenny J(1), Coelho S(1), Tyndall D(2), Walker
RJ(3), Devauges V(1), Richardson J(3), Dutton N(2), Barber P(4), Li DD(5),
Suhling K(6), Ng T(7), Henderson RK(2), Ameer-Beg SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Studies, Guy's Campus, Kings College, London, UK ; Randall 
Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Guy's Campus, Kings College, London,
UK. (2)Institute for Integrated Micro and Nano Systems, School of Engineering,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. (3)Institute for Integrated Micro and
Nano Systems, School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK ;
Photon-Force Ltd., Edinburgh, UK. (4)Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology &
Biology, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ UK. (5)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical
Sciences, 161 Cathedral Street, Glasgow, G4 0RE, UK. (6)Department of Physics,
King's College London, Strand, London, UK. (7)Division of Cancer Studies, Guy's
Campus, Kings College, London, UK ; Randall Division of Cell and Molecular
Biophysics, Guy's Campus, Kings College, London, UK ; UCL Cancer Institute, Paul 
O'Gorman Building, University College London, London WC1E 6DD, UK.

We demonstrate diffraction limited multiphoton imaging in a massively parallel,
fully addressable time-resolved multi-beam multiphoton microscope capable of
producing fluorescence lifetime images with sub-50ps temporal resolution. This
imaging platform offers a significant improvement in acquisition speed over
single-beam laser scanning FLIM by a factor of 64 without compromising in either 
the temporal or spatial resolutions of the system. We demonstrate FLIM
acquisition at 500 ms with live cells expressing green fluorescent protein. The
applicability of the technique to imaging protein-protein interactions in live
cells is exemplified by observation of time-dependent FRET between the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the adapter protein Grb2 following stimulation 
with the receptor ligand. Furthermore, ligand-dependent association of HER2-HER3 
receptor tyrosine kinases was observed on a similar timescale and involved the
internalisation and accumulation or receptor heterodimers within endosomes. These
data demonstrate the broad applicability of this novel FLIM technique to the
spatio-temporal dynamics of protein-protein interaction.

PMCID: PMC4354599
PMID: 25780724  [PubMed]


7. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):909-14. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2111. Epub 2015 Feb 
26.

The proliferative effects of Pyropia yezoensis peptide on IEC-6 cells are
mediated through the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway.

Lee MK(1), Kim IH(2), Choi YH(2), Choi JW(1), Kim YM(2), Nam TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Pukyong National University, Busan
608-737, Republic of Korea. (2)Institute of Fisheries Science, Pukyong National
University, Busan 619-911, Republic of Korea.

For a number of years, seaweed has been used as a functional food in Asian
countries, particularly in Korea, Japan and China. Pyropia yezoensis is a marine 
red alga that has potentially beneficial biological activities. In this study, we
examined the mechanisms through which a Pyropia yezoensis peptide [PYP1 (1-20)]
induces the proliferation of IEC-6 cells, a rat intestinal epithelial cell line, 
and the involvement of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
pathway. First, cell viability assay revealed that PYP1 (1-20) induced cell
proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner. Subsequently, we examined the 
mechanisms responsible for this induction of proliferation induced by PYP1
(1-20). EGFR is widely expressed in mammalian epithelial tissues, and the binding
of this ligand affects a variety of cell physiological parameters, such as cell
growth and proliferation. PYP1 (1-20) increased the expression of EGFR, Shc,
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) and son of sevenless (SOS). EGFR
also induced the activation of the Ras signaling pathway through Raf, MEK and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation. In addition, cell
cycle analysis revealed the expression of cell cycle-related proteins. The
results demonstrated an increased number of cells in the G1 phase and an enhanced
cell proliferation. In addition, the upregulation of cyclin D, cyclin E, Cdk2,
Cdk4 and Cdk6 was observed accompanied by a decreased in p21 and p27 expression. 
These findings suggest that PYP1 (1-20) stimulates the proliferation of rat IEC-6
cells by activating the EGFR signaling pathway. Therefore, PYP1 (1-20) may be a
potential source for the development of bio-functional foods which promotes the
proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4356455
PMID: 25716690  [PubMed - in process]


8. BMC Genet. 2015 Feb 5;16:9. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0170-7.

Identification of kinases and regulatory proteins required for cell migration
using a transfected cell-microarray system.

Onuki-Nagasaki R(1,)(2), Nagasaki A(3), Hakamada K(4,)(5,)(6), Uyeda TQ(7),
Miyake M(8), Miyake J(9,)(10), Fujita S(11).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. 
r-nagasaki@aist.go.jp. (2)Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science, 5-3-1 Kojimachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-0083, Japan.
r-nagasaki@aist.go.jp. (3)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. a-nagasaki@aist.go.jp. (4)Biomedical Research
Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan.
Hakamada.Kazumi@sysmex.co.jp. (5)Department of Mechanical Science and
Bioengineering, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, 1-3
Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan.
Hakamada.Kazumi@sysmex.co.jp. (6)Current address: Central Research Laboratories
Sysmex Corporation, 4-4-4 Takatsukadai, Nishi-ku, Kobe, 657-2271, Japan.
Hakamada.Kazumi@sysmex.co.jp. (7)Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. t-uyeda@aist.go.jp. (8)Biomedical Research
Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan.
masato-miyake@aist.go.jp. (9)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. jun_miyake@bpe.es.osaka-u.ac.jp. (10)Department of
Mechanical Science and Bioengineering, Graduate School of Engineering Science,
Osaka University, 1-3 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan.
jun_miyake@bpe.es.osaka-u.ac.jp. (11)Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. s-fujita@aist.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: Cell migration plays a major role in a variety of normal biological
processes, and a detailed understanding of the associated mechanisms should lead 
to advances in the medical sciences in areas such as cancer therapy. Previously, 
we developed a simple chip, based on transfected-cell microarray (TCM)
technology, for the identification of genes related to cell migration. In the
present study, we used the TCM chip for high-throughput screening (HTS) of a
kinome siRNA library to identify genes involved in the motility of highly
invasive NBT-L2b cells.
RESULTS: We performed HTS using TCM coupled with a programmed image tracer to
capture time-lapse fluorescence images of siRNA-transfected cells and calculated 
speeds of cell movement. This first screening allowed us to identify 52 genes.
After quantitative PCR (qPCR) and a second screening by a conventional
transfection method, we confirmed that 32 of these genes were associated with the
migration of NBT-L2b cells. We investigated the subcellular localization of
proteins and levels of expression of these 32 genes, and then we used our results
and databases of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) to construct a hypothetic
but comprehensive signal network for cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: The genes that we identified belonged to several functional
categories, and our pathway analysis suggested that some of the encoded proteins 
functioned as the hubs of networks required for cell migration. Our signal
pathways suggest that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an upstream
regulator in the network, while Src and GRB2 seem to represent nodes for control 
of respective the downstream proteins that are required to coordinate the many
cellular events that are involved in migration. Our microarray appears to be a
useful tool for the analysis of protein networks and signal pathways related to
cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4365556
PMID: 25652422  [PubMed - in process]


9. Sci Signal. 2015 Jan 13;8(359):ra4. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005906.

Annotation of human cancers with EGFR signaling-associated protein complexes
using proximity ligation assays.

Smith MA(1), Hall R(2), Fisher K(3), Haake SM(2), Khalil F(4), Schabath MB(5),
Vuaroqueaux V(6), Fiebig HH(6), Altiok S(4), Chen YA(3), Haura EB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (2)Graduate Medical Education, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (3)Department of
Biostatistics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL
33612, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (5)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (6)Oncotest
GmbH, Am Flughafen 12-14, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. (7)Department of Thoracic
Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612,
USA. eric.haura@moffitt.org.

Strategies to measure functional signaling-associated protein complexes have the 
potential to augment current molecular biomarker assays, such as genotyping and
expression profiling, used to annotate diseases. Aberrant activation of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling contributes to diverse cancers. We used a
proximity ligation assay (PLA) to detect EGFR in a complex with growth factor
receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2), the major signaling adaptor for EGFR. We used
multiple lung cancer cell lines to develop and characterize EGFR:GRB2 PLA and
correlated this assay with established biochemical measures of EGFR signaling. In
a panel of patient-derived xenografts in mice, the intensity of EGFR:GRB2 PLA
correlated with the reduction in tumor size in response to the EGFR inhibitor
cetuximab. In tumor biopsies from three cohorts of lung cancer patients, positive
EGFR:GRB2 PLA was observed in patients with and without EGFR mutations, and the
intensity of EGFR:GRB2 PLA was predictive of overall survival in an EGFR
inhibitor-treated cohort. Thus, we established the feasibility of using PLA to
measure EGFR signaling-associated protein complexes in patient-based materials,
suggesting the potential for similar assays for a broader array of receptor
tyrosine kinases and other key signaling molecules.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4440040 [Available on 2016-01-13]
PMID: 25587191  [PubMed - in process]


10. Chin J Physiol. 2014 Dec 31;57(6):350-7. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2014.BAD281.

Effects of RING-SH2GrbÂ², a chimeric protein containing the E3 ligase domain of
Cbl, on the EGFR pathway.

Lee WH(1), Wang PY, Lin YH, Chou HY, Lee YH, Lee CK, Pai LM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

The E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase Casitas B-lineage lymphoma protein (Cbl)
negatively regulates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway in
many organisms, and has crucial roles in cell growth, development and human
pathologies, including lung cancers. RING-SH2GrbÂ² a chimeric protein of 215 amino
acids containing the RING domain of Cbl that provides E3 ligase activity, and the
SH2 domain of Grb2 that serves as an adaptor for EGFR. In this study, we
demonstrated that RING-SH2GrbÂ² could promote the ubiquitinylation and degradation
of EGFR in a human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell line H1299. Moreover, we
discovered that the RING-SH2GrbÂ² chimera promoted the internalization of
ligand-bound EGFR, inhibited the growth of H1299 cells, and significantly
suppressed tumor growth in a xenograft mouse model. In summary, our results
revealed a potential new cancer therapeutic approach for non-small cell lung
cancer.

PMID: 25575524  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cancer Lett. 2015 Apr 1;359(1):57-64. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.043. Epub
2015 Jan 5.

Chimeric ubiquitin ligases inhibit non-small cell lung cancer via negative
modulation of EGFR signaling.

Zhong D(1), Ru Y(2), Wang Q(2), Zhang J(3), Zhang J(2), Wei J(4), Wu J(5), Yao
L(2), Li X(6), Li X(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032,
China; Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, the Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Cancer Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China. (3)Experiment Teaching
Center, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Research Center, Tangdu Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, China. (5)Department
of Orthopaedics, the Affiliated Southeast Hospital of Xiamen University,
Zhangzhou, Fujian 363000, China. (6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu
Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, China.
Electronic address: lxfchest@fmmu.edu.cn. (7)State Key Laboratory of Cancer
Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China. Electronic address:
lixia@fmmu.edu.cn.

Targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) represents a promising
therapeutic strategy for non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). The
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a major pathway that mediates protein
degradation. To target the degradation of EGFR, we generated two artificial
ubiquitin ligases, which are composed of an EGFR-binding domain, i.e., the SH2
domain from growth factor receptor binding protein 2 (Grb2), and an ubiquitin
ligase catalytic domain, i.e., the RING domain from Cbl or the U-box domain from 
CHIP. When the chimeric ubiquitin ligases were introduced into lung cancer SPC-A1
cells, they effectively associated with EGFR, promoted its ubiquitination and
degradation, and as a result, blocked the downstream PI3K-Akt signal pathway.
Moreover, cell proliferation and invasion were inhibited, the sensitivity to
docetaxel-induced apoptosis was enhanced and the tumorigenicity was suppressed.
In conclusion, negative modulation of EGFR signaling by the chimeric ubiquitin
ligases can inhibit malignancy of SPC-A1 cells and sensitize these cells to
chemotherapy, thus it may be applied to targeted therapy for NSCLC.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25573345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J R Soc Interface. 2015 Feb 6;12(103). pii: 20141215. doi:
10.1098/rsif.2014.1215.

Analytical reduction of combinatorial complexity arising from multiple protein
modification sites.

Birtwistle MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA
marc.birtwistle@mssm.edu.

Combinatorial complexity is a major obstacle to ordinary differential equation
(ODE) modelling of biochemical networks. For example, a protein with 10 sites
that can each be unphosphorylated, phosphorylated or bound to adaptor protein
requires 3(10) ODEs. This problem is often dealt with by making ad hoc
assumptions which have unclear validity and disallow modelling of site-specific
dynamics. Such site-specific dynamics, however, are important in many biological 
systems. We show here that for a common biological situation where adaptors bind 
modified sites, binding is slow relative to modification/demodification, and
binding to one modified site hinders binding to other sites, for a protein with n
modification sites and m adaptor proteins the number of ODEs needed to simulate
the site-specific dynamics of biologically relevant, lumped bound adaptor states 
is independent of the number of modification sites and equal to m + 1, giving a
significant reduction in system size. These considerations can be relaxed
considerably while retaining reasonably accurate descriptions of the true system 
dynamics. We apply the theory to model, using only 11 ODEs, the dynamics of
ligand-induced phosphorylation of nine tyrosines on epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and primary recruitment of six signalling proteins (Grb2, PI3K,
PLCÎ³1, SHP2, RasA1 and Shc1). The model quantitatively accounts for
experimentally determined site-specific phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
rates, differential affinities of binding proteins for the phosphorylated sites
and binding protein expression levels. Analysis suggests that local concentration
of site-specific phosphatases such as SHP2 in membrane subdomains by a factor of 
approximately 10(7) is critical for effective site-specific regulation. We
further show how our framework can be extended with minimal effort to consider
binding cooperativity between Grb2 and c-Cbl, which is important for receptor
trafficking. Our theory has potentially broad application to reduce combinatorial
complexity and allow practical simulation of a variety ODE models relevant to
systems biology and pharmacology applications to allow exploration of key aspects
of complexity that control signal flux.

Â© 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305424 [Available on 2016-02-06]
PMID: 25519995  [PubMed - in process]


13. Genetica. 2014 Dec;142(6):517-23. doi: 10.1007/s10709-014-9798-x. Epub 2014 Nov
7.

Sequence analysis of the Ras-MAPK pathway genes SOS1, EGFR & GRB2 in silver foxes
(Vulpes vulpes): candidate genes for hereditary hyperplastic gingivitis.

Clark JA(1), Tully SJ, Dawn Marshall H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's NL, A1B
3X9, Canada, j.clark@mun.ca.

Hereditary hyperplastic gingivitis (HHG) is an autosomal recessive disease that
presents with progressive gingival proliferation in farmed silver foxes.
Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is an analogous condition in humans that
is genetically heterogeneous with several known autosomal dominant loci. For one 
locus the causative mutation is in the Son of sevenless homologue 1 (SOS1) gene. 
For the remaining loci, the molecular mechanisms are unknown but Ras pathway
involvement is suspected. Here we compare sequences for the SOS1 gene, and two
adjacent genes in the Ras pathway, growth receptor bound protein 2 (GRB2) and
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), between HHG-affected and unaffected
foxes. We conclude that the known HGF causative mutation does not cause HHG in
foxes, nor do the coding regions or intron-exon boundaries of these three genes
contain any candidate mutations for fox gum disease. Patterns of molecular
evolution among foxes and other mammals reflect high conservation and strong
functional constraints for SOS1 and GRB2 but reveal a lineage-specific pattern of
variability in EGFR consistent with mutational rate differences, relaxed
functional constraints, and possibly positive selection.

PMID: 25377643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Tumour Biol. 2014 Dec;35(12):12497-508. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2568-7. Epub 2014
Sep 14.

Essential role of polymorphism of Gab1, EGFR, and EGF for the susceptibility of
biliary tract cancer.

Meng LQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110004, China,
lingqinm425@163.com.

Cholangiocarcinoma is a malignant neoplasm arising from the epithelial cells
lining the biliary ducts and its occurrence can be anatomically classified as
within the liver (intrahepatic) or outside the liver (extrahepatic). Extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, which can be called as biliary tract cancer (BTC), is the
most common form of this malignancy, and its etiology is still unclear. In this
study, we tried to elucidate the complicated association between receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) gene polymorphisms and susceptibility of BTC by analyzing
frequency distribution of genotypes and alleles of GRB2-associated-binding
protein 1 (Gab1), endothelial growth factor receptor (EGFR), and endothelial
growth factor (EGF) and identified potential risk of BTC for people carrying
specific genotype of Gab1 and EGFR. Two hundred twenty-five and 300 patients with
BTC and cholelithiasis (gallstone (GS)), respectively, and 300 controls matched
by age, sex, and ethnicity with patients were recruited from Shengjing Hospital
of China Medical University from January 2008 to July 2011 with informed
consents. Genomic DNA of BTC group was extracted and purified from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissue sections using QiAamp DNA FFPE
Tissue kit. For GS group and controls, DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
leukocytes using genomic DNA extraction kit from Aid Lab. Target genes of RTK
family were identified from National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
SNP database and Japanese Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (JSNP) database.
Frequency distribution of genotypes and alleles was analyzed using HapMap Project
database. All of the statistical analysis was conducted with SPSS 13.0 software. 
Eight loci were identified for Gab1 (4), EGFR (3), and EGF (1) as the target
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for the association of gene polymorphisms 
and BTC. A/A genotype and A allele of rs3805246 in Gab1 and G/G genotype and G
allele of rs2017000 in EGFR were significantly higher in BTC group than in GS
group or controls. After controlling for BMI, age, gender, and smoking habit,
patients with "A/A + G/A" had 2.154 times odds to have BTC; as for patients with 
"A/A" only, they still had 1.976 times odds to have BTC. In the rs2017000 of
EGFR, patients with "G/G + G/A" had 1.772 times odds to have BTC, and patients
with "G/G" only had 1.530 times odds to have BTC. Furthermore, patients with A/A 
in rs3805246 and G/G in rs2017000 simultaneously had 1.620 times chance to have
BTC than people with other genotypes. This study explored the independent
potential effect of EGFR signaling transduction pathway and its downstream
element Gab1 and the gene-gene interaction on the disease mechanism of BTC in the
perspective of genetics and molecular epidemiology.

PMID: 25217982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMB Rep. 2014 Oct;47(10):581-6.

YAC tripeptide of epidermal growth factor promotes the proliferation of HaCaT
keratinocytes through activation of EGFR.

Yoo YH(1), Kim YR(1), Kim MS(1), Lee KJ(1), Park KH(1), Hahn JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is known to play key roles in skin regeneration and
wound-healing. Here, we demonstrate that Pep2-YAC, a tripeptide covering residues
29-31 in the B loop of EGF, promotes the proliferation of HaCaT keratinocytes
with activity comparable to EGF. The treatment of HaCaT cells with Pep2-YAC
induced phosphorylation, internalization, and degradation of EGFR and
organization of signaling complexes, which consist of Grb2, Gab1, SHP2, and PI3K.
In addition, it stimulated the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 at Thr 202/Tyr 204 and
of Akt1 at Ser 473 and the nuclear translocation of EGFR, STAT3, c-Jun, and
c-Fos. These results suggest that Pep2-YAC may be useful as a therapeutic agent
for skin regeneration and wound-healing as an EGFR agonist.

PMCID: PMC4261517
PMID: 25179402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 15;74(20):5866-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0806. Epub 
2014 Aug 28.

Dsh homolog DVL3 mediates resistance to IGFIR inhibition by regulating IGF-RAS
signaling.

Gao S(1), Bajrami I(2), Verrill C(3), Kigozi A(2), Ouaret D(1), Aleksic T(1),
Asher R(3), Han C(1), Allen P(4), Bailey D(4), Feller S(1), Kashima T(1),
Athanasou N(5), Blay JY(6), Schmitz S(7), Machiels JP(7), Upile N(8), Jones
TM(8), Thalmann G(9), Ashraf SQ(1), Wilding JL(1), Bodmer WF(1), Middleton
MR(10), Ashworth A(2), Lord CJ(2), Macaulay VM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Cellular Pathology and NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research 
Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (4)Department of Cellular Pathology, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. (5)Nuffield
Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, Department 
of Pathology, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom. (6)University 
Claude Bernard Lyon I, Centre LÃ©on BÃ©rard, Department of Medicine, Lyon, France. 
(7)Service d'oncologie mÃ©dicale, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UniversitÃ©
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (8)Liverpool CR-UK Centre, Department
of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Royal Liverpool University Hospital,
Liverpool, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Urology, Inselspital, Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (10)Oxford Cancer and Haematology Centre, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Oncology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford Cancer
and Haematology Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Oxford, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
valentine.macaulay@oncology.ox.ac.uk.

Drugs that inhibit insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGFI) receptor IGFIR were
encouraging in early trials, but predictive biomarkers were lacking and the drugs
provided insufficient benefit in unselected patients. In this study, we used
genetic screening and downstream validation to identify the WNT pathway element
DVL3 as a mediator of resistance to IGFIR inhibition. Sensitivity to IGFIR
inhibition was enhanced specifically in vitro and in vivo by genetic or
pharmacologic blockade of DVL3. In breast and prostate cancer cells,
sensitization tracked with enhanced MEK-ERK activation and relied upon MEK
activity and DVL3 expression. Mechanistic investigations showed that DVL3 is
present in an adaptor complex that links IGFIR to RAS, which includes Shc, growth
factor receptor-bound-2 (Grb2), son-of-sevenless (SOS), and the tumor suppressor 
DAB2. Dual DVL and DAB2 blockade synergized in activating ERKs and sensitizing
cells to IGFIR inhibition, suggesting a nonredundant role for DVL3 in the
Shc-Grb2-SOS complex. Clinically, tumors that responded to IGFIR inhibition
contained relatively lower levels of DVL3 protein than resistant tumors, and DVL3
levels in tumors correlated inversely with progression-free survival in patients 
treated with IGFIR antibodies. Because IGFIR does not contain activating
mutations analogous to EGFR variants associated with response to EGFR inhibitors,
we suggest that IGF signaling achieves an equivalent integration at the
postreceptor level through adaptor protein complexes, influencing cellular
dependence on the IGF axis and identifying a patient population with potential to
benefit from IGFIR inhibition.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25168481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Sci Signal. 2014 Aug 19;7(339):ra78. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005157.

The ErbB4 CYT2 variant protects EGFR from ligand-induced degradation to enhance
cancer cell motility.

Kiuchi T(1), Ortiz-Zapater E(2), Monypenny J(1), Matthews DR(3), Nguyen LK(4),
Barbeau J(3), Coban O(3), Lawler K(3), Burford B(5), Rolfe DJ(6), de Rinaldis
E(5), Dafou D(7), Simpson MA(7), Woodman N(8), Pinder S(8), Gillett CE(8),
Devauges V(3), Poland SP(3), Fruhwirth G(3), Marra P(5), Boersma YL(9), PlÃ¼ckthun
A(9), Gullick WJ(10), Yarden Y(11), Santis G(2), Winn M(12), Kholodenko BN(4),
Martin-Fernandez ML(6), Parker P(13), Tutt A(5), Ameer-Beg SM(14), Ng T(15).

Author information: 
(1)Richard Dimbleby Department of Cancer Research, Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, Guy's Medical School Campus, London 
SE1 1UL, UK. Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London SE1 1UL,
UK. Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, Research Oncology, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. (2)Department of Asthma, Allergy and 
Respiratory Science, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(3)Richard Dimbleby Department of Cancer Research, Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, Guy's Medical School Campus, London 
SE1 1UL, UK. Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London SE1 1UL,
UK. (4)Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland. (5)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, Research Oncology, King's
College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. (6)Central Laser Facility,
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Science and Technology Facilities Council,
Research Complex at Harwell, Didcot OX11 0QX, UK. (7)Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. (8)Guy's and
St Thomas' Breast Tissue and Data Bank, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London SE1 9RT, UK. Research Oncology, Division of Cancer Studies, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. (9)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Zurich, 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (10)Department of
Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NJ, UK. (11)Department of 
Biological Regulation, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. 
(12)Computational Science and Engineering Department, Daresbury Laboratory,
Science and Technology Facilities Council, Research Complex at Warrington,
Warrington WA4 4AD, UK. (13)Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London,
London SE1 1UL, UK. Protein Phosphorylation Laboratory, Cancer Research UK,
London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK. (14)Richard
Dimbleby Department of Cancer Research, Randall Division of Cell and Molecular
Biophysics, King's College London, Guy's Medical School Campus, London SE1 1UL,
UK. Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK.
simon.ameer-beg@kcl.ac.uk tony.ng@kcl.ac.uk. (15)Richard Dimbleby Department of
Cancer Research, Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's
College London, Guy's Medical School Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. Division of
Cancer Studies, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Breakthrough Breast
Cancer Research Unit, Research Oncology, King's College London, Guy's Hospital,
London SE1 9RT, UK. UCL Cancer Institute, Paul O'Gorman Building, University
College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. simon.ameer-beg@kcl.ac.uk tony.ng@kcl.ac.uk.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of the ErbB family that
can promote the migration and proliferation of breast cancer cells. Therapies
that target EGFR can promote the dimerization of EGFR with other ErbB receptors, 
which is associated with the development of drug resistance. Understanding how
interactions among ErbB receptors alter EGFR biology could provide avenues for
improving cancer therapy. We found that EGFR interacted directly with the CYT1
and CYT2 variants of ErbB4 and the membrane-anchored intracellular domain (mICD).
The CYT2 variant, but not the CYT1 variant, protected EGFR from ligand-induced
degradation by competing with EGFR for binding to a complex containing the E3
ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl and the adaptor Grb2. Cultured breast cancer cells
overexpressing both EGFR and ErbB4 CYT2 mICD exhibited increased migration. With 
molecular modeling, we identified residues involved in stabilizing the EGFR
dimer. Mutation of these residues in the dimer interface destabilized the complex
in cells and abrogated growth factor-stimulated cell migration. An exon array
analysis of 155 breast tumors revealed that the relative mRNA abundance of the
ErbB4 CYT2 variant was increased in ER+ HER2- breast cancer patients, suggesting 
that our findings could be clinically relevant. We propose a mechanism whereby
competition for binding to c-Cbl in an ErbB signaling heterodimer promotes
migration in response to a growth factor gradient.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25140053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 May;43(5):313-7.

[Expression profiling of metastasis-related microRNAs in early esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu J(1), Xue L, Jin M, Lyu N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100020, China. 
(2)Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100021, China. E-mail:nlu03@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the difference of microRNA (miRNA) expression between two
groups of early stage (pT1N0) esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients 
who had different outcome and the prognostic significance of different miRNA in
metastatic of early ESCC, and to identify useful prognostic markers in the
selection of appropriate treatment for early ESCC patients.
METHODS: TaqMan human miRNA arrays and bioinformatics were used to detect and
analyze the expression profiles of miRNAs in the two groups, and RT-PCR was used 
to verify the differences in miRNA expression.
RESULTS: The miRNA arrays revealed a total of 41 markedly changed miRNAs in the
survival group compared with the death group. Bioinformatics analysis, prediction
and significant function analyses of targeted genes and pathway analysis
identified that miR-27a, miR-143 and miR-886-5p levels were increased or
decreased by seven-folds or more. The enriched target genes were GRB2, SOS1,
MAPK1, EGFR, CBL, SPRY2, RPS6KA5, IGF1R, NGFR, MAPK14 and CREB1. These genes were
significantly related to the following signaling pathways, i.e.Sprouty regulation
of tyrosine kinase signals pathway, Erk1/Erk2 Mapk signaling pathway and
transcription factor CREB and its extracellular signals.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-27a, miR-886-5p, and miR-143 may be potential prognostic markers
of metastasis for early ESCC. The detection of these miRNAs plays a directive
role for the treatment options of early ESCC. The regulation of targeted genes
and mechanism remain to be further studied.

PMID: 25030863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S743-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3889-x. Epub 
2014 Jul 17.

Clinical significance of GAB2, a scaffolding/docking protein acting downstream of
EGFR in human colorectal cancer.

Matsumura T(1), Sugimachi K, Takahashi Y, Uchi R, Sawada G, Ueda M, Hirata H,
Sakimura S, Ueo H, Takano Y, Kurashige J, Shinden Y, Eguchi H, Sudo T, Yamamoto
H, Doki Y, Mori M, Mimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Oita, Japan,
tmatsumura@beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: Recent studies indicated that the scaffolding adaptor protein GAB2
(GRB2-associated binding protein 2) plays a critical role in the proliferation
and migration of various cancers. This study aimed to determine the role of
aberrant GAB2 expression in human colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
was used to evaluate GAB2 mRNA expression in 152 CRC tissues samples to determine
the clinicopathological significance of GAB2 expression. We also performed in
vitro proliferation assays using siGAB2-transfected CRC cells.
RESULTS: GAB2 expression in tumor colorectal tissues was significantly higher
than in normal colorectal tissues (p = 0.0212). High GAB2 expression levels were 
associated with malignant clinicopathologic potential factors, including
lymphatic invasion (p = 0.0003), venous invasion (p = 0.0170), and liver
metastasis (p = 0.0144). The survival rate of patients with high GAB2 expression 
levels was significantly lower than that of patients with low GAB2 expression (p 
= 0.0074). Multivariate analysis indicated that GAB2 expression was a factor
affecting lymph node metastasis. Cell proliferation was significantly suppressed 
by siGAB2 expression in CRC cells in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: GAB2 expression was associated with lymph node metastasis and may
play a role in the growth and metastasis of CRC. These results suggest that GAB2 
is a potential therapeutic target in CRC.

PMID: 25029990  [PubMed - in process]


20. ACS Synth Biol. 2015 Apr 17;4(4):421-9. doi: 10.1021/sb500083t. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Rapid evaluation of tyrosine kinase activity of membrane-integrated human
epidermal growth factor receptor using the yeast GÎ³ recruitment system.

Fukuda N(1), Honda S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of the receptor tyrosine
kinase family and plays key roles in the regulation of fundamental cellular
processes, including cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and
survival. Deregulation of EGFR tyrosine kinase activity is involved in the
development and progression of human cancers. In the present study, we attempted 
to develop a method to evaluate the tyrosine kinase activity of human EGFR using 
the yeast GÎ³ recruitment system. Autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the 
cytoplasmic tail of EGFR induces recruitment of Grb2-fused GÎ³ subunits to the
inner leaflet of the plasma membrane in yeast cells, which leads to G-protein
signal transduction and activation of downstream signaling events, including
mating and diploid cell growth. We demonstrate that our system is applicable for 
the evaluation of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which are regarded as promising
drug candidates to prevent the growth of tumor cells. This approach provides a
rapid and easy-to-use tool to select EGFR-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors
that are able to permeate eukaryotic membranes and function in intracellular
environments.

PMID: 25006755  [PubMed - in process]


1. J Pharm Sci Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 1;1(2):160-164.

Modulation of Epidermal Growth Factor Stimulated ERK Phosphorylation and Cell
Motility by Inositol Trisphosphate Kinase.

Sekar MC(1), Shahiwala K(1), Leloup L(2), Wells A(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Findlay, Findlay, 45840, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 15261, PA, USA.

Epidermal growth factor [EGF] mediated stimulation of its receptor in endothelial
cell [EC] is accompanied by phosphorylation of the EGF-receptor [EGFR] and
activation of phospholipase C-Î³, resulting in the breakdown of
phosphatidylinositol(4,5)-bisphosphate and generating inositol
(1,4,5)-trisphosphate [IP3] and diacylglycerol. IP3 thus formed can be further
converted to inositol (1,3,4,5)-tetrakisphosphate [IP4] by an enzyme called
IP3-kinase [IP3K]. In this study we have investigated the effect of modulation of
intracellular IP3K activity by the use of an inhibitor, 2-trifluoromethyl
[6-(4-nitrobenzyl)-purine] [IP3KI] and siRNA against IP3KB on EGF-induced
ERK-phosphorylation and cell motility. EGF stimulated ERK-phosphorylation that
has been implicated in EGF-stimulated cell migration was inhibited by both IP3KI 
and siRNA against IP3KB. Inhibition of ERK-phosphorylation was accompanied by
decreased cell migration in the presence of IP3KI.

PMCID: PMC4512952
PMID: 26213696  [PubMed]


2. Neurochem Int. 2015 Jul 21. pii: S0197-0186(15)30009-7. doi:
10.1016/j.neuint.2015.07.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Rapidly activated epidermal growth factor receptor mediates
lipopolysaccharide-triggered migration of microglia.

Qu WS(1), Liu JL(2), Li CY(1), Li X(1), Xie MJ(1), Wang W(1), Tian DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China. (2)Cancer 
center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430023, P.R. China. (3)Department of Neurology, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China. Electronic address: tiands@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

Previous reports have suggested that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
involved in microglia activation characterized by cell morphology changes,
cytokine production and cell migration; and the biochemical regulation of the
microglia migration is a potential therapeutic target following CNS inflammatory 
damages. However, the role of EGFR in microglia motility after inflammatory
stimulation remains unknown. In the present study, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was
found to trigger rapid EGFR phosphorylation within 10 min, which was sustained
during long-term stimulation in both primary microglial cells and the cultured
BV2 microglial cells, furthermore, blocking EGFR phosphorylation by AG1478
significantly attenuated the LPS-induced chemotactic and chemokinetic migration
of microglia. In addition, LPS could initiate calcium oscillation in microglia
during live-cell recording, however, an intracellular calcium chelator and a
selective inhibitor of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, but not an
extracellular calcium chelator, remarkably suppressed the LPS-induced EGFR
phosphorylation in BV2 microglia cells. As EGFR is not a traditional receptor for
LPS, these findings suggest that the rapid phosphorylation of EGFR is attributed 
to the LPS-triggered intracellular calcium mobilization. By examining the
downstream signals of EGFR, we further proved that extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) is essential for EGFR-mediated microglia migration, because ERK
inhibition attenuated the chemotactic and chemokinetic migration of microglia
that had been induced by either LPS or EGF. Collectively, these results suggest
that LPS could trigger the rapid phosphorylation of EGFR and subsequent ERK
activation through mobilizing calcium activity, which underlies the microglia
migration in an inflammatory condition.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26209152  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Endocrinol Invest. 2015 Jul 25. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetics of Cushing's disease: an update.

Perez-Rivas LG(1), Reincke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitÃ¤t MÃ¼nchen,
Ziemssenstrasse 1, 80336, Munich, Germany, luis.perez@med.lmu.de.

INTRODUCTION: Cushing's disease (CD) results from uncontrolled hypercortisolism
induced by ACTH-secreting corticotroph adenomas; accordingly, patients diagnosed 
with CD usually present several comorbidities and an increased risk of mortality.
Hypothesis-driven screenings have led to identification of rare alterations in a 
low number of patients, although the genetic basis underlying CD has remained
unclear until recently. Using whole-exome sequencing, recurrent mutations have
been reported in the gene coding for the ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8), a 
protein with deubiquitinase (DUB) activity that modulates the lysosomal turnover 
of the EGF receptor (EGFR) and other membrane proteins.
METHODS: In this review, we summarize the recent genetic findings and discuss the
clinical and pathological implications of USP8 deregulation in corticotroph
adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in USP8 have been identified in 35-62 % of functional
sporadic corticotroph adenomas causing Cushing's disease, but not in any other
type of pituitary tumor. These mutations are found mostly in adult female
patients and lead to an aberrant DUB activation by impairing the regulation of
USP8 by members of the 14-3-3 family of proteins. The consequence of this
hyperactivation is a longer retention of EGFR at the plasma membrane which
promotes an enhanced production of ACTH.

PMID: 26208471  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Neuroscience. 2015 Jul 20. pii: S0306-4522(15)00635-1. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.07.021. [Epub ahead of print]

EGFR signaling upregulates surface expression of the GluN2B-containing NMDA
receptor and contributes to long-term potentiation in the hippocampus.

Tang Y(1), Ye M(1), Du Y(1), Qiu X(1), Lv X(1), Yang W(1), Luo J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of the
Ministry of Health of China, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310058, China. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Key Laboratory of Medical 
Neurobiology of the Ministry of Health of China, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China. Electronic address:
luojianhong@zju.edu.cn.

N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) have been known to be regulated by
various receptor tyrosine kinases. Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) specifically increases NMDAR-mediated currents and enhances long-term
potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus. However, the mechanism through which EGFR 
regulates NMDARs remains to be elucidated. In this study we found that EGFR was
highly expressed in the hippocampus and mainly localized in the non-synaptic
region including the soma and neurites of cultured hippocampal neurons. EGFR
activation led to an increase in ifenprodil-sensitive NMDAR currents. Consistent 
with this, we also observed that surface expression of GluN2B-containing NMDAR
was upregulated. Our biochemical data from hippocampal slices and hippocampal
cultured neurons demonstrated that EGF treatment in vitro significantly increased
phosphorylation of the GluN2B subunit at Y1472 with a coincidental activation of 
Src family kinases (SFKs). EGFR blockade with a specific antagonist BIBX-1382
attenuated an increase of GluN2B in the postsynaptic density during
high-frequency stimulation (HFS)-induced LTP. Moreover, BIBX blockade
significantly impaired HFS-induced LTP. In conclusion, our findings suggest that 
EGFR signaling upregulates NMDARs through modification of the GluN2B subunit, and
is required for HFS-induced LTP in the hippocampus.

Copyright Â© 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26204818  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 25;15:545. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1544-y.

High basal Wnt signaling is further induced by PI3K/mTor inhibition but sensitive
to cSRC inhibition in mammary carcinoma cell lines with HER2/3 overexpression.

Timmermans-Sprang EP(1), Gracanin A(2), Mol JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584, CM, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
e.p.m.timmermans@uu.nl. (2)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584, CM,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. a.gracanin@uu.nl. (3)Department of Clinical Sciences of
Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan
104, 3584, CM, Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.a.mol@uu.nl.

BACKGROUND: Elevated basal, ligand-independent, Wnt signaling in some canine
breast cancer cells is not caused by classical mutations in APC, Î²-Catenin or
GSK3Î² but, at least partially, by enhanced LEF1 expression. We examined the
expression and function of EGFR/HER-regulated pathways on the ligand-independent 
Wnt signaling.
METHODS: Twelve canine mammary tumor cell lines with previously reported
differential basal Wnt activity were used. The expression levels of genes related
to EGF-signaling were analyzed by cluster analysis. Cell lines with a combined
overexpression of EGF-related genes and enhanced basal Wnt activity were treated 
with PI3K/mTor or cSRC inhibitors or transfected with a construct expressing
wild-type PTEN. Subsequently, effects were measured on Wnt activity, cell
proliferation, gene expression and protein level.
RESULTS: High basal Wnt/LEF1 activity was associated with overexpression of
HER2/3, ID1, ID2, RAC1 and HSP90 together with low to absent cMET and PTEN mRNA
expression, suggesting a connection between Wnt- and HER-signaling pathways.
Inhibition of the HER-regulated PI3K/mTor pathway using the dual PI3K/mTor
inhibitor BEZ235 or the mTor inhibitor EverolimusÂ® resulted in reduced cell
proliferation. In the cell line with high basal Wnt activity, however, an
unexpected further increased Wnt activity was found that could be greatly reduced
after inhibition of the HER-regulated cSRC activity. Inhibition of the PI3K/mTor 
pathway was associated with enhanced expression of Î²-Catenin, Axin2, MUC1, cMET, 
EGFR and HER2 and a somewhat increased Î²-Catenin protein content, whereas cSRC
inhibition was associated with slightly enhanced HER3 and SLUG mRNA expression. A
high protein expression of HER3 was found only in a cell line with high basal Wnt
activity.
CONCLUSIONS: High basal Wnt activity in some mammary cancer cell lines is
associated with overexpression of HER-receptor related genes and HER3 protein,
and the absence of PTEN. Inhibition of the PI3K/mTor pathway further stimulated, 
however, canonical Wnt signaling, whereas the inhibitory effect with the cSRC
inhibitor Src-I1 on the Wnt activity further suggested a connection between Wnt
and HER2/3-signaling.

PMCID: PMC4513708
PMID: 26205886  [PubMed - in process]


6. Biol Reprod. 2015 Jul 22. pii: biolreprod.115.130971. [Epub ahead of print]

LH-Induced Steroidogenesis in the Mouse Ovary, but Not Testis, Requires Matrix
Metalloproteinase 2 and 9-Mediated Cleavage of Upregulated EGF Receptor Ligands.

Light A, Hammes SR.

Oocyte maturation and cumulus cell expansion depend on LH-mediated upregulation
of membrane bound EGF-like ligands, including amphiregulin, epiregulin, and
betacellulin. These ligands then trans-activate the EGF receptor (EGFR) after
release by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). However, direct measurement of
released EGF-like ligands or MMPs from granulosa cells has not been formally
evaluated, nor has direct identification of responsible MMPs. Here we address
these issues by analyzing LH-induced steroidogenesis, which is also MMP- and
EGFR-dependent, in freshly isolated mouse primary granulosa cells. We demonstrate
a correlation between amphiregulin and epiregulin mRNA induction and steroid
production in LH-treated granulosa cells as well as in ovaries of hCG-treated
mice. In contrast, LH does not alter Mmp1, Mmp2, Mmp3, Mmp8, Mmp9, or Adam17 mRNA
expression. We demonstrate that, in primary mouse granulosa cells, LH triggers
release of soluble amphiregulin that correlates with steroid production, both of 
which are blocked by MMP2/9 inhibition, confirming that MMP2/9 likely regulates
LH-induced amphiregulin release and downstream processes. Notably, LH does not
alter secretion of MMP2/9 from primary granulosa cells, nor does it modulate MMP 
activity. These findings indicate that, in the ovary, LH dictates EGFR-mediated
processes not by regulating MMPs, but instead by increasing EGF-like ligand
availability. In contrast, LH stimulation of primary mouse Leydig cells does not 
induce EGF-like ligand expression or require MMP2/9 for steroidogenesis,
confirming marked differences in LH receptor-induced processes in the testes. Our
results suggest that MMP inhibition may be a means of attenuating excess ovarian 
steroid production in diseases like polycystic ovary syndrome.

Copyright 2015 by The Society for the Study of Reproduction.

PMID: 26203177  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 20. pii: 201511794. [Epub ahead of print]

Erlotinib protects against LPS-induced Endotoxicity because TLR4 needs EGFR to
signal.

De S(1), Zhou H(2), DeSantis D(3), Croniger CM(3), Li X(2), Stark GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195; starkg@ccf.org des@ccf.org. (2)Department of Immunology,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195; (3)Department
of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH
44106.

Several components of the canonical pathway of response to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) are required for the EGF-dependent activation of NFÎºB. Conversely, the
ability of Toll-like Receptor 4 (TLR4) to activate NFÎºB in response to LPS is
impaired by down regulating EGF receptor (EGFR) expression or by using the EGFR
inhibitor erlotinib. The LYN proto-oncogene (LYN) is required for signaling in
both directions. LYN binds to the EGFR upon LPS stimulation, and erlotinib
impairs this association. In mice, erlotinib blocks the LPS-induced expression of
tumor necrosis factor Î± (TNFÎ±) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) and ameliorates
LPS-induced endotoxity, revealing that EGFR is essential for LPS-induced
signaling in vivo.

PMID: 26195767  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Microsc Res Tech. 2015 Jul 15. doi: 10.1002/jemt.22544. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemical localization of epidermal growth factor system in the lung of
the Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix japonica) during the post-hatching period.

Alan E(1), LÄ°man N(1), SaÄsÃ¶z H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Erciyes, Kayseri, Turkey. (2)Department of Histology and
Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Dicle, DiyarbakÄ±r,
Turkey.

The purpose of this study is to determine the possible changes in the
localization of the four Epidermal Growth Factor Receptors and three ligands in
quail lungs from the first day of hatching until the 125th after hatching using
immunohistochemical methods. Immunohistochemical results demonstrated that four
EGFRs and their ligands are chiefly located in the cytoplasm of cells.
Additionally, ErbB4, AREG, and NRG1 are localized to the nucleus and nucleolus,
but EGF is present in the nucleolus. ErbB2 was also found in the cell membrane.
In the epithelium of secondary bronchi, the goblet cells only exhibited ErbB1 and
ErbB2, whereas the basal and ciliated cells exhibited EGFRs and ligands
immunoreactivity. The atrial granular cells displayed moderate levels of
ErbB1-ErbB3 and EGF and strong levels of ErbB4, AREG, and NRG1 immunoreactivity. 
While the squamous atrial cells and squamous respiratory cells of air capillaries
and endothelial cells of blood capillaries exhibited moderate to strong ErbB2,
ErbB4, AREG, and NRG1 immunoreactivity, they had negative or weak ErbB1, ErbB3,
and EGF immunoreactivity. The expression levels of ErbB2-ErbB4, EGF, AREG, and
NRG1 were also detected in fibroblasts. Although ErbB2 was highly expressed in
the bronchial and vascular smooth muscle cells, weak expression of ErbB1, ErbB3, 
AREG and EGF and moderate expression of ErbB4 and NRG1 were observed. Macrophages
were only negative for ErbB1. In conclusion, these data indicate that the
EGFR-system is functionally active at hatching, which supports the hypothesis
that the members of EGFR-system play several cell-specific roles in quail lung
growth after hatching. Microsc. Res. Tech., 2015. Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26179370  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0132737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132737.
eCollection 2015.

Î±PIX Is a Trafficking Regulator that Balances Recycling and Degradation of the
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor.

KortÃ¼m F(1), Harms FL(1), Hennighausen N(1), Rosenberger G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

Endosomal sorting is an essential control mechanism for signaling through the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). We report here that the guanine
nucleotide exchange factor Î±PIX, which modulates the activity of Rho-GTPases, is 
a potent bimodal regulator of EGFR trafficking. Î±PIX interacts with the E3
ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl, an enzyme that attaches ubiquitin to EGFR, thereby
labelling this tyrosine kinase receptor for lysosomal degradation. We show that
EGF stimulation induces Î±PIX::c-Cbl complex formation. Simultaneously, Î±PIX and
c-Cbl protein levels decrease, which depends on both Î±PIX binding to c-Cbl and
c-Cbl ubiquitin ligase activity. Through interaction Î±PIX sequesters c-Cbl from
EGFR and this results in reduced EGFR ubiquitination and decreased EGFR
degradation upon EGF treatment. However, quantitatively more decisive for
cellular EGFR distribution than impaired EGFR degradation is a strong stimulating
effect of Î±PIX on EGFR recycling to the cell surface. This function depends on
the GIT binding domain of Î±PIX but not on interaction with c-Cbl or Î±PIX exchange
activity. In summary, our data demonstrate a previously unappreciated function of
Î±PIX as a strong promoter of EGFR recycling. We suggest that the novel recycling 
regulator Î±PIX and the degradation factor c-Cbl closely cooperate in the
regulation of EGFR trafficking: uncomplexed Î±PIX and c-Cbl mediate a positive and
a negative feedback on EGFR signaling, respectively; Î±PIX::c-Cbl complex
formation, however, results in mutual inhibition, which may reflect a stable
condition in the homeostasis of EGF-induced signal flow.

PMCID: PMC4503440
PMID: 26177020  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015 Jul 15:0. [Epub ahead of print]

The small GTPase ADP-Ribosylation Factor 1 mediates the sensitivity of triple
negative breast cancer cells to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Haines E(1), Schlienger S, Claing A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology , Faculty of Medicine, UniversitÃ© de MontrÃ©al ,
Montreal, QC , Canada H3C 3J7.

The clinical use of EGFR-targeted therapy, in triple negative breast cancer
patients, has been limited by the development of resistance to these drugs.
Although activated signaling molecules contribute to this process, the molecular 
mechanisms remain relatively unknown. We have previously reported that the small 
GTPase ADP-Ribosylation Factor 1 (ARF1) is highly expressed in invasive breast
cancer cells and acts as a molecular switch to activate EGF-mediated responses.
In this study, we aimed at defining whether the high expression of ARF1 limits
sensitivity of these tumor cells to EGFR inhibitors, such as gefitinib. Here, we 
show that the knock down of ARF1 expression or activity decreased the dose and
latency time required by tyrosine kinase inhibitors to induce cell death. This
may be explained by the observation that the depletion of ARF1 suppressed
gefitinib-mediated activation of key mediators of survival such as ERK1/2, AKT
and Src, while enhancing cascades leading to apoptosis such as the p38MAPK and
JNK pathways, modifying the Bax/Bcl2 ratio and cytochrome c release. In addition,
inhibiting ARF1 expression and activation also results in an increase in
gefitinib-mediated EGFR internalization and degradation further limiting the
ability of this receptor to promote its effects. Interestingly, we observed that 
gefitinib treatment resulted in the enhanced activation of ARF1 by promoting its 
recruitment to the receptor AXL, an important mediator of EGFR inhibition
suggesting that ARF1 may promote its pro-survival effects by coupling to
alternative mitogenic receptors in conditions where the EGFR is inhibited.
Together our results uncover a new role for ARF1 in mediating the sensitivity to 
EGFR inhibition and thus suggest that limiting the activation of this GTPase
could improve the therapeutic efficacy of EGFR inhibitors.

PMID: 26176330  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. J Biomed Sci. 2015 Jul 15;22:53. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0165-8.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces VCAM-1-mediated inflammation via
c-Src-dependent transactivation of EGF receptors in human cardiac fibroblasts.

Lin CC(1,)(2), Pan CS(3,)(4), Wang CY(3,)(4), Liu SW(1,)(2), Hsiao LD(1,)(2),
Yang CM(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkuo, Kwei-Shan, 
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (2)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Health
Aging Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa
1st Road, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (5)Department of Physiology, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw. (6)Department of Pharmacology and Health Aging Research
Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road,
Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Tumor necrosis factor-Î± (TNF-Î±) is a proinflammatory cytokine and
elevated in the regions of tissue injury and inflammatory diseases. The
deleterious effects of TNF-Î± on fibroblasts may aggravate heart inflammation
mediated through the up-regulation of adhesion molecules such as vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). However, the mechanisms underlying TNF-Î±-induced
VCAM-1 expression in cardiac fibroblasts remain unknown. This study aimed to
investigate the roles of TNF-Î± in VCAM-1 expression and its effects on human
cardiac fibroblasts (HCFs).
RESULTS: The primary culture HCFs were used in this study. The results obtained
with Western blotting, real time-quantitative PCR, and promoter activity analyses
showed that TNF-Î±-induced VCAM-1 expression was mediated through TNF receptor
(TNFR) 1-dependent gene up-regulation. Activation of TNFR1 by TNF-Î±
transactivated c-Src-dependent EGF receptor (EGFR) linking to PI3K/Akt cascade,
and then led to transcriptional activity of NF-ÎºB. Moreover, the results of
promoter reporter assay demonstrated that the phosphorylated p65 NF-ÎºB turned on 
VCAM-1 gene expression. Subsequently, up-regulation of VCAM-1 promoted monocytes 
adhesion to HCFs challenged with TNF-Î± determined by cell adhesion assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate that in HCFs, activation of
NF-ÎºB by c-Src-mediated transactivation of EGFR/PI3K/Akt cascade is required for 
TNF-Î±-induced VCAM-1 expression. Finally, increased VCAM-1 enhances monocytes
adhering to HCFs challenged with TNF-Î±. Understanding the mechanisms of VCAM-1
up-regulated by TNF-Î± on HCFs may provide rationally therapeutic interventions
for heart injury or inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC4502472
PMID: 26173590  [PubMed - in process]


12. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jul;10(1):479-484. Epub 2015 May 19.

Nitric oxide/cyclic guanosine monophosphate inducers sodium nitroprusside and
L-arginine inhibit the proliferation of gastric cancer cells via the activation
of type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase.

Yao X(1), Wu Y(1), Zhu M(1), Qian H(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China.

Nitric oxide (NO) may activate soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC), resulting in the
increase of intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), a key molecule
in the activation of type II cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG II). In our
previous study, the membrane-permeable cGMP analogue 8-pCPT-cGMP was used to
activate PKG II. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether
NO/sGC-induced endogenous cGMP is able to activate PKG II and induce the
corresponding effects. In the AGS gastric cancer cell line, the expression of PKG
II was increased by infecting the cells with an adenoviral construct encoding PKG
II cDNA (Ad-PKG II) and the activation of PKG II was induced by 8-pCPT-cGMP
(positive control), the NO donor sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and the NO precursor 
L-arginine. ELISA was performed to detect the concentration of cGMP in AGS cells 
and the Cell Counting Kit-8 was used to analyze the proliferation of differently 
treated cells. Western blot analysis was used to detect the expression and
phosphorylation of associated proteins. The results demonstrated that the level
of cGMP was increased in cells treated with the NO donor or precursor. There was 
an obvious increase of Ser239 phosphorylation of the vasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein, representing the increase in the activity of PKG II. The
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced proliferation of AGS cells was inhibited by
infection with Ad-PKG II and treatment with SNP or L-arginine. In addition,
EGF-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor (EGFR) and
tyrosine/serine phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
were also inhibited by infection with Ad-PKG II and treatment with the NO donor
or precursor. These data indicated that NO donors and precursors may activate the
expression of PKG II, thereby blocking EGF-initiated signaling of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase/ERK pathway and inhibiting EGF-induced
proliferative activity through preventing the phosphorylation of EGFR at tyr1068.

PMCID: PMC4487134
PMID: 26171055  [PubMed]


13. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Jul 10. pii: S0891-5849(15)00335-4. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.07.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 2 mediates resistance
to Hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress in Human hepatobiliary Cancer
cells.

Ho-Bouldoires TH(1), ClapÃ©ron A(1), Mergey M(1), Wendum D(2), Desbois-Mouthon
C(1), Tahraoui S(1), Fartoux L(3), Chettouh H(1), Merabtene F(1), Scatton O(4),
Gaestel M(5), Praz F(1), Housset C(3), Fouassier L(6).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France; 
Sorbonne UniversitÃ©s, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche
Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France. (2)INSERM, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche 
Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France; Sorbonne UniversitÃ©s, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 
UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France; AP-HP,
HÃ´pital Saint-Antoine, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques,
F-75012Paris, France. (3)INSERM, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine,
F-75012, Paris, France; Sorbonne UniversitÃ©s, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938,
Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France; AP-HP, HÃ´pital
Saint-Antoine, Service d'HÃ©patologie, F-75012Paris, France. (4)INSERM, UMR_S 938,
Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France; Sorbonne UniversitÃ©s, 
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris,
France; AP-HP, HÃ´pital Saint-Antoine, Service de Chirurgie HÃ©pato-Biliaire et
Transplantation HÃ©patique, F-75012, Paris, France. (5)Institute of Physiological 
Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, d-30625 Hannover,
Germany. (6)INSERM, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris,
France; Sorbonne UniversitÃ©s, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, Centre de Recherche 
Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France. Electronic address:
laura.fouassier@inserm.fr.

The development and progression of liver cancer are characterized by increased
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS-induced oxidative stress impairs
cell proliferation and ultimately leads to cell death. Although liver cancer
cells are especially resistant to oxidative stress, mechanisms of such resistance
remain understudied. We identified the MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2)/Heat
shock protein 27 (Hsp27) signaling pathway mediating defenses against oxidative
stress. Besides to MK2 and Hsp27 overexpression in primary liver tumors compared 
to adjacent non-tumorous tissues, MK2/Hsp27 pathway is activated by hydrogen
peroxide-induced oxidative stress in hepatobiliary cancer cells. MK2 inactivation
or inhibition of MK2 or Hsp27 expression increases Caspase-3 and PARP cleavage
and DNA breaks, and therefore cell death. Interestingly, MK2/Hsp27 inhibition
decreases antioxidant defenses such as heme-oxygenase 1 (HO-1) through
down-regulation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid-derived
2-like 2 (Nrf2). Moreover, MK2/Hsp27 inhibition decreases both phosphorylation of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and expression of its ligand,
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF). A new identified partner of MK2,
the scaffold PDZ-protein EBP50, could facilitate these effects through MK2/Hsp27 
pathway regulation. These findings demonstrate that MK2/Hsp27 pathway actively
participates in resistance to oxidative stress and may contribute to liver cancer
progression.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26169728  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Prognostic significance of the tumour-adjacent tissue in head and neck cancers.

Raudenska M(1,)(2), Sztalmachova M(1,)(2), Gumulec J(1,)(2), Fojtu M(1,)(2,)(3), 
Polanska H(1,)(2), Balvan J(1,)(2), Feith M(1), Binkova H(4), Horakova Z(4),
Kostrica R(4), Kizek R(2,)(5), Masarik M(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk
University, Kamenice 5, CZ-625 00, Brno, Czech Republic. (2)Central European
Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology, Technicka 3058/10, CZ-616
00, Brno, Czech Republic. (3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, CZ-625 00, Brno, Czech Republic. (4)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, St. Anne's Faculty Hospital,
Pekarska 53, CZ-656 91, Brno, Czech Republic. (5)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Mendel University in Brno, Zemedelska 1, CZ-613 00, Brno, Czech
Republic. (6)Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Kamenice 5, CZ-625 00, Brno, Czech Republic. masarik@med.muni.cz.
(7)Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology,
Technicka 3058/10, CZ-616 00, Brno, Czech Republic. masarik@med.muni.cz.

Even with significant advances in operative skills and adjuvant therapies, the
overall survival of patients suffering with head and neck squamous cancers
(HNSCC) is unsatisfactory. Accordingly, no clinically useful prognostic
biomarkers have been found yet for HNSCC. Many studies analysed the expression of
potential markers in tumour tissues compared to adjacent tissues. Nevertheless,
due to the sharing of the same microenvironment, adjacent tissues show molecular 
similarity to tumour tissues. Thus, gene expression patterns of 94 HNSCC tumorous
tissues were compared with 31 adjacent tissues and with 10 tonsillectomy
specimens of non-cancer individuals. The genes analysed at RNA level using
quantitative RT-PCR and correlated with clinico-pathological conditions were as
follows: EGF, EGFR, MKI67, BCL2, BAX, FOS, JUN, TP53, VEGF, FLT1, MMP2, MMP9,
MT1A and MT2A. The elevated MT2A, BAX, EGF and JUN expression was associated with
the influence of tumour cells on the rearrangement of healthy tissues, as well as
a significant shift in the BAX/BCL2 ratio. Our investigation also indicated that 
adjacent tissues play an important role in cancerogenesis by releasing several
tumour-supporting factors such as EGF. A gradual increase in the metallothionein 
expression, from the lowest one in tonsillectomy samples to the highest ones in
tumour samples, suggests that MT expression might be tissue reaction to the
presence of tumour cells. The results of this study confirmed the significance of
metallothionein in tumori-genesis and gave evidences for its use as a potential
HNSCC biomarker. Furthermore, this study highlighted the importance of
histologically normal tumour-adjacent tissue in prediction of HNSCC progress.

PMID: 26168959  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Anticancer Res. 2015 Aug;35(8):4433-40.

Validity of HB-EGF as Target for Human Neuroblastoma Therapy.

Nam SO(1), Yotsumoto F(2), Miyata K(1), Souzaki R(3), Taguchi T(3), Kuroki M(4), 
Miyamoto S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka
University, Fukuoka, Japan Central Research Institute for Advanced Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Central
Research Institute for Advanced Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka, Japan Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine,
Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka
University, Fukuoka, Japan Central Research Institute for Advanced Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan
smiya@cis.fukuoka-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common and lethal extracranial
solid tumor in children. The present study aimed to verify that the
heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is a rational
target in NB therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We examined expression of EGFR ligands in four NB cell
lines using 2-dimensional culture (DC) and 3DC conditions. To assess the
anti-tumor effect of cross-reacting material 197 (CRM197), which is a specific
inhibitor of HB-EGF, on NB cells, we also performed terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay to detect apoptotic cells.
RESULTS: HB-EGF was predominantly expressed in two out of four NB cell lines
under 2DC and 3DC conditions. CRM197 significantly induced apoptosis of NB cells 
with high HB-EGF expression.
CONCLUSION: HB-EGF plays an important role in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis and
CRM197 showed an effective antitumor effect in neuroblastoma cells.

CopyrightÂ© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26168483  [PubMed - in process]


16. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Jul 8. pii: mbc.E14-11-1547. [Epub ahead of print]

Interferon-gamma-inducible Rab20 regulates endosomal morphology and EGFR
degradation in macrophages.

Pei G(1), Schnettger L(2), Bronietzki M(1), Repnik U(3), Griffiths G(3),
Gutierrez MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)*Research Group Phagosome Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany. (2)The Francis Crick Institute,
Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway. (4)The
Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA,
United Kingdom Maximiliano.Gutierrrez@crick.ac.uk.

Little is known about the molecular players that regulate changes in the
endocytic pathway during immune activation. Here, we investigated the role of
Rab20 in the endocytic pathway during activation of macrophages. Rab20 is
associated with endocytic structures but the function of this Rab GTPase in the
endocytic pathway remains poorly characterized. We found that in macrophages,
Rab20 expression and endosomal association significantly increased after
interferon-gamma (IFN-Î³) treatment. Moreover, IFN-Î³ as well as Rab20 expression
induced a dramatic enlargement of endosomes. These enlarged endosomes are the
result of homotypic fusion promoted by Rab20 expression. The expression of Rab20 
or the dominant-negative mutant Rab20T19N did not affect transferrin or Dextran
70 kDa uptake. However, knockdown of Rab20 accelerated epidermal growth factor
(EGF) trafficking to LAMP-2-positive compartments and EGF receptor (EGFR)
degradation. Thus, this work defines a function for Rab20 in the endocytic
pathway during immune activation of macrophages.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26157167  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Jul 4. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10511. [Epub ahead of print]

Gab1 amplifies signalling in response to low-intensity stimulation by HGF.

Aasrum M(1), ÃdegÃ¥rd J(1), Thoresen GH(1,)(2), Brusevold IJ(1,)(3), Sandnes
DL(1), Christoffersen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo
and Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 1057, Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Oslo, P.O. Box 1068, Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of Oral Biology
and Department of Paediatric Dentistry and Behavioural Science, Faculty of
Dentistry, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1052, Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.

The receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR and Met induce phosphorylation of the docking 
protein Gab1, and there is evidence that Gab1 may have a role in the signalling
from these receptors. Studying hepatocytes, we previously found that although
Gab1 mechanistically interacted in different ways with EGFR and Met, it was
involved in mitogenic signalling induced by both EGF and HGF. It has been
reported that in EGFR signalling Gab1 is required particularly at a low dose of
EGF. Whether this also applies to HGF/Met signalling has not been investigated.
We have studied the role of Gab1 in activation of the Akt and ERK pathways at
low- and high-intensity stimulation with EGF and HGF in cultured hepatocytes. In 
cells where Gab1 was depleted by a specific Gab1-directed siRNA, the EGF-induced 
phosphorylation of ERK was lowered and HGF-induced phosphorylation of both ERK
and Akt was substantially reduced. These effects were more marked at low-dose HGF
stimulation. The inhibitory consequence of Gab1 depletion was particularly
pronounced for HGF-induced Akt phosphorylation. The results suggest that Gab1 is 
an important signal amplifier for low-intensity stimulation by HGF.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26146811  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2781-2786. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase inhibits
epidermal growth factor receptor activation in different cancer cell lines.

Jiang LU(1), Wu M(1), Wu Y(1), Lan T(1), Wang Y(1), Qian H(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China.

Previous data has revealed that type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent 
protein kinase (PKG II) inhibits epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced
phosphorylation/activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK)
in gastric cancer cells. The aim of the present study was to determine whether
PKG II inhibited EGF-induced phosphorylation/activation of EGFR and MAPK/ERK in
cell lines derived from different cancer tissues. SW480, HepG2, OS-RC-2, A549,
MCF-7 and U251 cells were transfected with adenoviral constructs encoding PKG II 
cDNA (Ad-PKG II) to upregulate the expression of PKG II, and then treated with
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-pCPT-cGMP) in order
to activate the kinase. Western blot analysis was performed to investigate the
phosphorylation of EGFR and MAPK/ERK. The results demonstrated that treatment
with 100 ng/ml EGF for 5 min increased the tyrosine (Tyr)1068 phosphorylation of 
EGFR and the threonine 202/Tyr204 phosphorylation of MAPK/ERK. Transfecting the
cells with Ad-PKG II, and stimulating the kinases with 8-pCPT-cGMP efficiently
inhibited the EGF-induced phosphorylation of EGFR and MAPK/ERK. The results
revealed that PKG II had an inhibitory effect upon EGFR activation and the
consequent MAPK/ERK-mediated signaling of cell lines derived from the various
cancer tissues.

PMCID: PMC4473676
PMID: 26137146  [PubMed]


19. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun 29. pii: MCB.00286-15. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphatidic acid (PA) increases EGF receptor (EGFR) expression by stabilizing
mRNA, inhibiting RNAse-A, and by inhibiting lysosomal and proteasomal degradation
of the internalized EGFR.

Hatton N(1), Lintz E(1), Mahankali M(1), Henkels K(1), Gomez-Cambronero J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wright State University School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Dayton, Ohio 45435. (2)Wright State University School of
Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dayton, Ohio 45435.
julian.cambronero@wright.edu.

Overexpression of epidermal growth factor (EGFR) is one of the frequent
mechanisms implicated in cancer progression and so is the overexpression of the
enzyme Phospholipase D (PLD) and its product of reaction, phosphatidic acid (PA).
However, understanding how these signaling molecules interact at the level of
gene expression is lacking. Catalytically active PLD enhanced expression of EGFR 
human breast cancer cells. Overexpression of the PLD2 isoform increased EGFR mRNA
and protein expression and prevented siEGFR-mediated reduction in EGFR
expression. Several mechanisms contributed to the alteration in EGFR expression. 
First was the stabilization of EGFR mRNA prolonging its half-life in PLD2 cells. 
Second, RNaseA enzymatic activity was inhibited by phosphatidic acid (PA). Third,
protein stabilization also occurred, as indicated by PLD-resistance to
cycloheximide-induced EGFR protein degradation. Fourth, PA inhibited lysosomal
and proteasomal degradation of internalized EGFR. A co-localization of PLD2, EGFR
and JAK3 phophorylation at Tyr980/981 followed receptor endocytosis, and the
presence of PLD2 increased stabilization of intracellular EGFR in large recycling
vesicles at â¼15 min of EGF stimulation. Thus, PLD2-mediated production of PA
contributed to the control of EGFR exposure to ligand through a multi-prolonged
transcriptional and post-transcriptional program during the out-of-control
accumulation of EGFR signaling in cancer cells.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26124282  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Cancer Sci. 2015 Jun 29. doi: 10.1111/cas.12730. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of microRNA-214 ameliorates hepatic fibrosis and tumor incidence in
platelet-derived growth factor C transgenic mice.

Okada H(1), Honda M(1,)(2), Campbell JS(3), Takegoshi K(1), Sakai Y(1), Yamashita
T(1), Shirasaki T(1), Takabatake R(1), Nakamura M(1), Tanaka T(4), Kaneko S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan. (2)Department of Advanced Medical Technology, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Health Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan. (3)Department of 
Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)The 
Tohkai Cytopathology Institute: Cancer Research and Prevention, Gifu, Japan.

Differentially regulated microRNAs (miRNAs) are associated with hepatic fibrosis;
however, their potential usefulness for blocking hepatic fibrosis has not been
exploited fully. We examined the expression of miRNAs in the liver of a
transgenic mouse model in which platelet-derived growth factor C (PDGF-C) is
overexpressed (Pdgf-c Tg), resulting in hepatic fibrosis and steatosis and the
eventual development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Robust induction of
miR-214 correlated with fibrogenesis in the liver of Pdgf-c Tg mice, atherogenic 
high-fat diet-induced NASH mice, and patients with chronic hepatitis B or C.
Pdgf-c Tg mice were injected with locked nucleic acid (LNA)-antimiR-214 via the
tail vein using Invivofectamine(Â®) 2.0 and the degree of hepatic fibrosis and
tumor incidence were evaluated. Pdgf-c Tg mice treated with LNA-antimiR-214
showed a marked reduction in fibrosis and tumor incidence compared with saline-
or LNA-miR-control-injected control mice. In vitro, LNA-antimiR-214 significantly
ameliorated TGF-Î²1-induced pro-fibrotic gene expression in Lx-2 cells. MiR-214
targets a negative regulator of EGFR signaling, Mig-6. Mimic-miR-214 decreased
the expression of Mig-6 and increased the levels of EGF-mediated p-EGFR (Y1173
and Y845) and p-Met (Tyr1234/1235) in Huh-7 cells. Conversely, LNA-antimiR-214
repressed the expression of these genes. In conclusion, miR-214 appears to
participate in the development of hepatic fibrosis by modulating the EGFR and
TGF-Î² signaling pathways. LNA-antimiR-214 may be a potentially therapy in the
prevention of hepatic fibrosis. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26122702  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

